KINGMAN’S SUBADDITIVE ERGODIC THEOREM Theorem 1.(Kingman’s theorem, ergodic case) Let(Ω, μ, T)be an ergodic measure-preserving system, and let(g n ) n≥1 be a sequence ofL 1 random variables that satisfy the subadditivity relation (1)g m+n ≤g n +g m ◦T n . Then (2)lim n→∞ g n n =γ:= inf n≥1 Eg n n a.s. Remark1.This is an extension of Birkhoff’s theorem, because for anyf∈L 1 the sequence g n :=S n fsatisfies the condition (1) (in fact with≤replaced by=). The importance of Kingman’s theorem lies in the fact that interestingsubadditivesequences are more common than interestingadditivesequences. Proof.This consists of establishing the two inequalities lim supg n /n≤γ;and(3) lim infg n /n≥γ.(4) (Here and in the remainder of the proof we drop the a.s. qualification.) In doing this, we may assume without loss of generality that the random variablesg n arenon-positive. To see this, observe that for any subadditive sequenceg n (that is, a sequence satisfying the subadditivity relations (1)), the sequence ̃g n :=g n −S n g 1 is also subadditive, and consists of non-positive random variables. Moreover, iflim ̃g n /n exists a.s. and is constant, thenlimg n /nalso exists and is constant, because the differ- ence between the two sequences is the sequenceS n g 1 /n, which by Birkhoff’s theorem converges toEg 1 . Upper Estimate:The first inequality is an easy consequence of Birkhoff’s theorem, but wtih one minor complication. The difficulty is that even thoughTis ergodic, itsm−fold iterateT m need not be ergodic. (Exercise: Provide an example.) Iterating the subadditivity condition (1) gives g nm+k ≤ n ∑ j=1 g m ◦T jm + k ∑ j=1 g 1 ◦T nm+j . The obvious strategy would be to fixm, let1≤k≤m, divide both sides bynm, let n→∞, and use Birkhoff on the right side to conclude that (5)lim supg n /n≤Eg m /m. 1 However, sinceT m need not be ergodic, the use of Birkhoff isn’t justified. Hence, we resort to the following indirect approach: iterate (1) in different ways to obtain g nm+k ≤ n−1 ∑ j=0 g m ◦T jm + k+m ∑ j=1 g 1 ◦T nm+j ; g nm+k ≤g 1 + n−1 ∑ j=0 g m ◦T jm+1 + k+m ∑ j=2 g 1 ◦T nm+j ; g nm+k ≤g 1 +g 1 ◦T+ n−1 ∑ j=0 g m ◦T jm+2 + k+m ∑ j=3 g 1 ◦T nm+j ; . . . Note that in each of these inequalities there are at mostk+m≤2mterms of the form g 1 ◦T i , butnmterms of the formg m ◦T i . Thus, upon taking the average of the firstm inequalities, one obtains g nm+k ≤ 1 m nm−1 ∑ j=0 g m ◦T j +remainder, where the remainder is an average of at mostmk≤m 2 terms of the formg 1 ◦T i . Now divide both sides bynmand letn→∞: in the limit, the remainder terms divided bynm will converge to zero, and Birkhoff’s theorem will apply to the rest, yielding the inequality (5). Since this holds for all values ofm, this proves the upper bound (3). Lower Estimate:For this estimate we use the assumption that the random variablesg n are non-positive. This implies thatγ≤0, and together with the subadditivity relation (1) implies that for any finite increasing sequence of nonnegative integers 1≤j 1 < j 1 +k 1 −1< j 2 < j 2 +k 2−1 <···< j r < j r +k r −1< N <∞ we have (6)g N ≤g k 1 ◦T j 1 +g k 2 ◦T j 2 +···+g k r ◦T j r . Define, for anyω∈Ω, G(ω) = lim inf n→∞ g n (ω)/n∈\[−∞,0\]. The subadditivity hypothesis (1) implies thatg n+1 ≤g 1 +g n ◦T, and hence, sinceg 1 /n→0, it follows that G≤G◦T. But becauseTis measure-preserving, the random variablesGandG◦Thave the same distribution, so it must be thatG=G◦Ta.s., and so the random variableGisinvari- ant. This implies thatGisconstant, because we have assumed that the system(Ω, μ, T)is ergodic. Thus, our task is to show that this constantGis not smaller thanγ. Suppose to the contrary thatG < γ−εfor someε >0. Theninfg n /n < γ−εa.s. Hence, by the monotone convergence theorem, for anyδ >0there existsmso large that μ(B)≥1−δwhereB=B m ={ω∈Ω : min 1≤n≤m g n /n < γ−ε}. Fixnlarge andω∈Ω, and label integersjin the range\[1, nm\]badifT j (ω)∈B. By construction, for each badj, there existsk≤mso that g k ◦T j (ω)< k(γ−ε). For each such pairj, kcolor the integers in the interval\[j, j+k−1\]blue. Then it is possible to select a subset of the blue intervals so that their union contains all of the bad integers j. (Keep the leftmost blue intervalI 1 = \[j 1 , j 1 +k 1 −1\], then delete from the collection all blue intervals whose left endpoints lie inI 1 , then keep the next leftmost blue intervalI 2 among those remaining, and so on.) Denote the blue intervals in this subcollection by I i = \[j i , j i +k i −1\]wherei= 1,2, . . . , r, and letLbe the sum of their lengths. Now apply (6): by construction, for each interval \[j i , j i +k i −1\]we have g k i ◦T j i (ω)< k i (γ−ε), so (6) implies that g nm+m (ω)< L(γ−ε)<(γ−ε) nm ∑ i=1 1 B (T i (ω)). Finally, divide both sides bynmand take expecations: E g nm+m nm ≤(γ−ε)μ(B)<(γ−ε)(1−δ). Lettingn→∞and using the definition ofγwe deduce that γ <(γ−ε)(1−δ). Butδ >0was arbitrary, so this is a contradiction.