A PROOF OF THE SUBADDITIVE ERGODIC THEOREM ANDERS KARLSSON For Wolfgang Woess on the occasion of his sixtieth birthday Abstract.This is a presentation of the subadditive ergodic the- orem. A proof is given that is an extension of F. Riesz’ approach to the Birkhoffergodic theorem. 1.Introduction Between the years 1938 and 1948 F. Riesz published works in ergodic theory \[R\] and found among other things several extensions of the mean ergodic theorem by elegantly simple and powerful arguments. In October 1931, von Neumann had proved the basic version of the mean ergodic theorem \[vN32\] inspired by Koopman’s observations published in a note in June that same year \[Ko31\]. In his 1944 lecture notes \[R44\] 1 , Riesz gave an insightful exposition of these developments. In particular, he presented there a new proof of the maximal ergodic lemma needed for Birkhoff’s a.e. ergodic theorem, which is a deeper result than the mean ergodic theorem and dates November 1931 \[B31\]. This became one of the standard proofs of this theorem and was based on a lemma which is harder to formulate than to prove (see Lemma 3.2 below). He also remarked that his work on the mean ergodic theorem was suggested by the method of Carleman \[C32\]. In fact, Carleman announced in May 1931 results similar to Koopman’s as well as a proof of the mean ergodic theorem. This announcement was published in June 1931 \[C31\] and the details can be found in \[C32\] 2 . The main purpose of this note is to show how Riesz’s method extends to give a proof of the subadditive ergodic theorem of Kingman from 1968 \[K68\]. This was a by-product of the work \[KM99\] and all the Date:December,2014. 1 He was supposed to deliver these lectures in Geneva in the spring of 1944, but he was prevented from coming. 2 Several early publications in the subject give due credit to Carleman, for ex- ample E. Hopf’s important monographErgodentheoriefrom 1938. In most modern works however, including the standard reference \[Kr85\], Carleman is not mentioned. 1 2ANDERS KARLSSON details of the proof are included. Note that this proof at the same time gives a proof of Birkhoff’s theorem. Let throughout this paper(X, μ)be a measure space withμ(X)=1 andT:X!Xameasurepreservingtransformation. Recallthe following result: Theorem(Birkhoff,1931).Letf2L 1 (X),then there is an integrable, a.e.T-invariant function ̄ fsuch that lim n!1 1 n n1 X k=0 f(T k x)= ̄ f(x) for a.e.x(the convergence also takes place inL 1 ).In fact ̄ f 1 kfk 1 and for anyT-invariant setA, R A f= R A ̄ f,in particular R X f= R X ̄ f. Note that if (1.1)c(n, x)= n1 X k=0 f(T k x) then c(n+m, x)=c(n, x)+c(m, T n x), and we then callcanadditive cocycle. These are all of the form (1.1), forf(x)=c(1,x). If for a sequence of functionsa(n, .)2L 1 (X), with integern>0and a(0,x)=0,weinsteadrequire a(n+m, x)a(n, x)+a(m, T n x), thenais here called asubadditive cocycle.Assumethat inf 1 n Z X a(n, x)dμ(x)>1. Then the following generalization of the Birkhoffergodic theorem holds. Theorem(Kingman, 1968).Under the above conditions, there is an integrable, a.e.T-invariant function ̄asuch that lim n!1 1 n a(n, x)= ̄a(x) for a.e.x(the convergence also takes place inL 1 ).Moreover lim n!1 1 n Z A a(n, x)dμ(x)= Z A ̄a(x)dμ(x) for allT-invariant measurable setsA. SUBADDITIVE ERGODIC THEOREM3 A draft of this paper was written in 1998 when I was a graduate student at Yale University. Some people have since told me that my text has been useful to them, so I thought that it might perhaps be worthwhile to publish a revised version. In addition, I thank the referee for useful comments leading to an improved text. I dedicate it to Wolfgang Woess, whom I have had the pleasure of knowing since more than a decade. I have at various times benefitted from his many insights within, as well as outside of, mathematics. 2.A few examples of subadditive cocycles We give a few examples of subadditive cocycles in order to illustrate that Kingman’s theorem is a significant extension of Birkhoff’s theo- rem with many applications. In fact the origin of Kingman’s theorem comes from probability theory (theory of percolation) in the works by Hammersley and Welsh. 2.1.Random products in a Banach algebra.LetA:X!Bbe ameasurablemapintoaBanachalgebra.Let u(n, x)=A(T n1 x)A(T n2 x)...A(x), then a(n, x) = logku(n, x)k is a subadditive cocycle, becausekABkkAkkBk.The correspond- ing convergence was first proved by Furstenberg and Kesten in 1960 for random products of matrices, of course without the use of the sub- additive ergodic theorem. This application is used in some proofs of Oseledets’ multiplicative ergodic theorem. 2.2.Random walks.LetGbe a topological group andh:X!Ga Borel measurable map. Letv(n, x)=h(T n1 x)...h(Tx)h(x),if{hT k } are independent, then this is usually called a random walk. The range, that is how many points visited inG, a(n, x) :=Card{v(i, x):1in} is a subadditive cocycle. Assume thatdis a left invariant metric onG,(e.g. a word metric in the caseGis finitely generated) then the drift b(n, x) :=d(e, v(n, x)) is a subadditive cocycle, by the triangle inequality and the invariance ofd.Athirdsourceofsubadditivityistheentropyofthemeasuresof the distribution of random walk afternsteps, see \[D80\]. 4ANDERS KARLSSON 2.3.Metric theory of continued fractions.See \[Ba97\]. LetX= \[0,1)andAbe the Borel-algebra. For anyxwrite it as x= 1 1 x = 1 \[ 1 x \]+{ 1 x } . Continuing this scheme gives the continued fraction expansion ofx, a(x) := \[ 1 x \],etc. The relevant transformation ofXis Tx={ 1 x } unlessx=0in which caseTx=0.Soa n (x)=a(T n1 x). The corresponding approximantsp n (x)/q n (x)are defined for allnif xis irrational, they are given by recusion formulas, and by p n (x) q n (x) = 1 a 1 (x)+ 1 a 2 (x)+ 1 . . . + 1 a n (x) . There is a uniqueT-invariant probability measure absolutely continu- ous with respect to Lebesgue measure, namely ⌫(A)= 1 log 2 Z A 1 1+x dx called the Gauss measure. By use of the subadditive ergodic theorem, Barbolosi proves that for all constantsC>0, lim n!1 1 n Card{1in:|xq i (x)p i (x)| C q i (x) } exists for a.e.x.The functions are not simply a subadditive cocycle, it is necessary to divide into odd and even index, due to the fact that approximants lie on alternating sides ofx. 2.4.Further examples.There are too many applications of the sub- additive ergodic theorem to list here, let us just refer to \[H72\] and \[D80\]. 3.A proof of Kingman’s theorem 3.1.Three elementary observations. SUBADDITIVE ERGODIC THEOREM5 Proposition 3.1.Let(v n ) n1 be a subadditive sequence of real num- bers, that isv n+m v n +v m .Then the following limit exists lim n!1 1 n v n = inf m>0 1 m v m 2R\[{1}. Proof.Given">0,pickMsuch thatv M /Minfv n /n+".Decompose n=k n M+r n ,where0r n <M.Hencek n /n!1/M .Using the subadditivity and consideringnbig enough (n>N(")) inf 1 m v m  1 n v n = 1 n v k n M+r n  1 n (k n v M +v r n )  1 M v M +"inf 1 m v m +2". Since"is at our disposal, the lemma is proved.⇤ Note that this proposition implies that for anyT-invariant setA, lim n!1 1 n Z A a(n, x)dμ(x) = inf n 1 n Z A a(n, x)dμ(x), whenX=Adenote this value by(a). F. Riesz noted in \[R44\] that the following simple lemma can be used to prove Birkhoff’s theorem, the lemma is sometimes called Riesz’s combinatorial lemma or the lemma about leaders. Lemma 3.2.Call the termc u aleaderinthefinitesequencec 0 ,c 1 , ..., c n1 if one of the sums c u ,c u +c u+1 , ..., c u +...+c n1 is negative. Then the sum of the leaders is non-positive. (An empty sum is by convention0). Proof.Proof by induction. Ifn=1,then eitherc 0 0, in which case the sum is empty, orc 0 <0,in which case the sum equalsc 0 <0. Assume that the statement is true for integers smaller thann.Con- sider the two cases,c 0 is or is not a leader. Ifc 0 is not a leader then all leaders are amongc 1 , ..., c n1 in which case the induction hypothesis applies. Ifc 0 is a leader, then pick the smallest integerksuch thatc 0 +...+c k < 0,then eachc i ,ikis a leader. If not thenc i +...+c k 0,but by minimalityc 0 +...+c i1 0, which is a contradiction. Hencec 0 , ..., c k are all leaders andc 0 +...+c k <0,the remaining lead- ers (if any) are leaders ofc k , ..., c n ,for which the induction hypothesis applies.⇤ 6ANDERS KARLSSON Proposition 3.3.Leta(n, x)be a subadditive cocycle as in the intro- duction. Then the functions f(x) = lim sup n!1 1 n a(n, x) and g(x) = lim inf n!1 1 n a(n, x) are a.eT-invariant. Proof.Note thatf(Tx)f(x)andg(Tx)g(x)because of the sub- additivity a(n, T x)a(n+1,x)a(1,x) and in the case of limsup (same for liminf) lim sup( 1 n a(n+1,x) 1 n a(1,x)) =f(x). Now integrate Z X \[f(Tx)f(x)\]dμ(x)=0 by theT-invariance, but the integrand is non-negative, hencef(Tx) f(x)=0a.e.⇤ 3.2.The maximal ergodic inequality.The following key lemma will be proved by an extension of the argument of F. Riesz. It thus avoids use of the usual maximal ergodic inequality and it is not more difficult than Derriennic’s proof. Lemma 3.4(Derriennic, 1975).Leta(n, x)be a subadditive ergodic cocycle as in the introduction. Let B={x: lim inf n!1 1 n a(n, x)<0} then lim n!1 1 n Z B a(n, x)dμ0. Proof.For eachn,let n ={x: inf 1kn a(n, x)a(nk, T k x)<0}. Note that A n :={x: inf 1kn a(k, x)<0}⇢ n by subadditivity. Note also thatA n ⇢A n+1 andB⇢ S A n . SUBADDITIVE ERGODIC THEOREM7 For eachn,let b n (x)=a(n, x)a(n1,Tx). Because of telescoping we have that a(n, x)a(nk, T k x)=b n (x)+b n1 (Tx)+...+b nk+1 (T k1 x) and in particular, recall thata(0,x)=0, a(n, x)= X 0kn1 b nk (T k x). By definition,T k x2 nk means that there is aj, kjn1such that b nk (T k x)+...+b nj (T j x)<0. Hence by the lemma about leaders applied toc k =b nk (T k x)we have X 0kn1,T k x2 nk b nk (T k x)0. Therefore, using theT-invariance ofμandB, 0 Z B X 0kn1,T k x2 nk b nk (T k x)dμ(x)= = X 0kn1 Z B\\T k nk b nk (T k x)dμ(x)= = X 0kn1 Z T k B\\ nk b nk (x)dμ(x)= = n X i=1 Z B\\ i b i (x)dμ(x). On the other hand, again by theT-invariance 1 n Z B a(n, x)dμ(x)= 1 n n X i=1 Z B b i (x)dμ(x)= = 1 n n X i=1 Z B\\ i b i (x)dμ(x)+ 1 n n X i=1 Z B(B\\ i ) b i (x)dμ(x) 0+ 1 n n X i=1 Z B(B\\A i ) a + (1,x)dμ(x) sinceb j (x)a(1,x)a + (1,x) := max{0,a(1,n)},which is positive andA i ⇢ i .Now sincea + 2L 1 ,A i ⇢A i+1 andB⇢ S i1 A i it follows 8ANDERS KARLSSON when taking limsup, that lim sup 1 n Z B a(n, x)dμ0. SinceBis invariant, the limsup actually is the limit, by Proposition 3.1.⇤ Proposition 3.5.Leta(n, x)be a subadditive ergodic cocycle as in the introduction. Let B={x: lim inf 1 n a(n, x)<} then lim n!1 1 n Z B a(n, x)dμμ(B). Proof.Apply the lemma toa(n, x)n,which is a subadditive cocycle. ⇤ 3.3.The proof of a.e. convergence.First we establish the result for additive cocyclesc n =c(n, x).The point is thatc n is again additive, hence in particular the previous proposition applies toc n as well. Let E ↵, ={x: lim inf 1 n c n <↵<<lim sup 1 n c n } and by Proposition 3.3 this set isT-invariant. Hence we can apply Proposition 3.5 withX=E ↵, .If we letE:={x: lim inf 1 n c n <↵}, thenE\\E ↵, =E ↵, ,and this gives Z E ↵, c 1 dμ= lim n!1 1 n Z E ↵, c n dμ↵μ(E ↵, ). And similarily forc n , Z E ↵, c 1 dμ= lim n!1 1 n Z E ↵, c n dμμ(E ↵, ). This yields a contradiction unlessμ(E ↵, )=0,because μ(E ↵, ) Z E ↵, c 1 dμ↵μ(E ↵, ) but>↵. Now leta n (x)=a(n, x),be a subadditive cocycle satisfying the integrability assumptions in the introduction. Consider v n (x)=a n (x) n1 X i=0 a 1 (T i x). SUBADDITIVE ERGODIC THEOREM9 Note thatv n is a subadditive cocycle andv n 0.Letg(x) = lim inf 1 n v n (x) andf(x) = lim sup 1 n v n (x).Foranarbitrary↵>0,wewanttoshow thatB:={x:f(x)g(x)>↵}has measure zero. By the additive co- cycle case above we know that 1 n P n1 i=0 a 1 (T i x)converges a.e., so taken together this would show that 1 n a n (x)converges a.e. as desired. Fix">0.PickMlarge enough so that for allm>M, 1 m Z X v m (v)+". Let g M (x) := lim inf n!1 1 nM v nM (x) and f M (x) := lim sup n!1 1 nM v nM (x). On the one hand, sincenMis a subsequence ofn,wehavethatg M (x) g(x)andf M (x)f(x).Ontheotherhand,bythesubadiditvityand non-positivity ofv n ,forall0k<M, v (n+1)M (x)v nM+k (x)+v Mk (T nM+k x)v nM+k (x) and v nM+k (x)v nM (x)+v k (T nM x)v nM (x). Therefore in view of that(n+1)nM/(nM+k)!1andnM/(nM+ k)!1,wecanconcludethatg M (x)=g(x)andf M (x)=f(x).Let v M n (x) :=v nM (x) n1 X i=0 v M (T iM x), which again is subadditive and non-positive. We then have that: fg=f M g M lim inf n!1 1 nM v M n , becausev M n 0and the established convergence for additive cocycles. This means that B:={x:fg>↵}⇢{x: lim inf n!1 1 n v M n (x)<M↵}=:E. Note that 0(v M )=M(v) Z X v M M". Now applying Proposition 3.5 we get M↵μ(E)lim 1 n Z E v M n lim 1 n Z X v M n M". 10ANDERS KARLSSON Hence μ(E) " ↵ and letting"!0we conclude thatμ(B)=0for any↵>0as required. The limit is almost everywhereT-invariant, by Proposition 3.3 and integrable by Fatou’s lemma Z lim inf 1 n v n lim inf Z 1 n v n <1. In general, R |a(n, x)|n R |a(1,x)|. 4.Appendix: Garsia’s proof of the maximal ergodic lemma This appendix, which is not used above, notes that Garsia’s cel- ebrated argument for Birkhoff’s ergodic theorem \[G70\] has a minor subadditive extension, although not strong enough to yield Kingman’s theorem. Lemma 4.1.Leta(n, x)be a subadditive ergodic cocycle as in the introduction. For1n1define E n ={x: sup 1kn a(k, x)0}. Then Z E n a(1,x)dμ0and Z E 1 a(1,x)dμ0. Proof.Let h n (x) = sup 1kn a(k, x), so h + n (x)a(k, x)0 forkn.By positivity and linearity ofT,viewedas(Koopman) operator on functions, Th + n Ta k forkn.(a k (x)=a(k, x)). Hence a 1 +Th + n a 1 +Ta k a k+1 by subadditivity. So a 1 a k+1 Th + n for allk,1knand trivially fork=0.Therefore a 1 sup 0kn1 a k+1 Th + n =h n Th + n . SUBADDITIVE ERGODIC THEOREM11 Now integrate Z E n a 1 Z E n h n Z E n Th + n = Z X h + n Z E n Th + n Z X h + n Z X Th + n 0, becauseTis measure preserving (or contractive as in \[G70\] would be enough) andh + n 0. The statement aboutE 1 = S E n follows from passing to the limit. ⇤ References \[Ba97\] Barbolosi, D. Une application du théorème ergodique sous-additif à la théorie métrique des fractions continues. J. Number Theory 66 (1997), no. 1, 172–182. \[B31\] Birkhoff,G.D.Proofoftheergodictheorem.Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA17 (1931) 656–660. \[C31\] Carleman, Torsten, Application de la théorie des équations intégrales sin- gulières aux équations différentielles de la dynamique,Ark. Mat. Astr. Fys. 22, 1931. \[C32\] Carleman, Torsten, Application de la théorie des équations intégrales linéaires aux systèmes d’équations différentielles non linéaires.Acta Math. 59 (1932), no. 1, 63–87. \[D75\] Derriennic, Yves, Sur le théorème ergodique sous-additif.C. R. Acad. Sci. ParisSér. A-B 281 (1975), no. 22, Aii, A985–A988. \[D80\] Derriennic, Yves, Quelques applications du théorème ergodique sous-additif. In:Conference on Random Walks(Kleebach, 1979) pp. 183–201, 4, Astérisque, 74, Soc. Math. France, Paris, 1980. \[G70\] Garsia, Adriano M.Topics in almost everywhere convergence.Lectures in Advanced Mathematics, 4 Markham Publishing Co., Chicago, Ill. 1970 x+154 pp. \[H72\] Hammersley, J. M. A few seedlings of research. In:Proceedings of the Sixth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability(Univ. Cali- fornia, Berkeley, Calif., 1970/1971), Vol. I: Theory of statistics, pp. 345–394. Univ. California Press, Berkeley, Calif., 1972. \[KM99\] Karlsson, Anders; Margulis, Gregory A., A multiplicative ergodic theo- rem and nonpositively curved spaces.Comm. Math. Phys.208(1999),no.1, 107–123. \[K68\] Kingman, J. F. C. The ergodic theory of subadditive stochastic processes.J. Roy. Statist. Soc.Ser. B 30 1968 499–510. \[Ko31\] Koopman, B.O. Hamiltionian systems and transformations in Hilbert space. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA,17(1931)pp.315–318. \[Kr85\] Krengel, Ulrich,Ergodic theorems.WithasupplementbyAntoineBrunel. de Gruyter Studies in Mathematics, 6. Walter de Gruyter & Co., Berlin, 1985. viii+357 pp. 12ANDERS KARLSSON \[vN32\] von Neumann, J. Proof of the quasi-ergodic hypothesis.Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA,18(1932)pp.70–82. \[R\] Riesz, Frigyes,Oeuvres complètes.Publiéessurl’ordredel’Académiedes Sciences de Hongrie par Ákos Császár. 2 Vols. Akadémiai Kiadó, Budapest 1960 1601 pp. (4 plates). \[R44\] F. Riesz, Sur la théorie ergodique,Comment. Math. Helv.17(1944-1945), 221-239 Université de Genève and Uppsala universitet