ON THE SUBADDITIVE ERGODIC THEOREM ARTUR AVILA AND JAIRO BOCHI Abstract.We present a simple proof of Kingman’s Subadditive Ergodic The- orem that does not rely on Birkhoff’s (Additive) Ergodic Theorem and there- fore yields it as a corollary. 1.Statements Throughout this note, let (X,A,μ) be a fixed probability space andT:X→X be a fixed measurable map that preserves the measureμ. Birkhoff ’s Ergodic Theorem(\[B\]).Letf 1 :X→Rbe an integrable function, and let (1)f n = n−1 ∑ j=0 f 1 ◦T j for alln≥1. Thenf n /nconverges a.e. to an integrable functionfsuch that ∫ f= ∫ f 1 . Kingman’s Subadditive Ergodic Theorem(\[Ki\]).Letf n :X→ Rbe a se- quence of measurable functions such thatf + 1 is integrable and (2)f m+n ≤f m +f n ◦T m for allm,n≥1. Thenf n /nconverges a.e. to a functionf:X→R. Moreover,f + is integrable and ∫ f= lim n→∞ 1 n ∫ f n = inf n 1 n ∫ f n ∈\[−∞,+∞). A sequence of functionsf n is calledsubadditiveif it satisfies (2), and is called additiveif equality holds in (2). Clearly every additive sequence takes the form (1). In this note we will prove Kingman’s Theorem and obtain Birkhoff’s Theorem as a corollary. 2.Proof Letf n :X→Rbe a subadditive sequence of functions withf + 1 (and therefore f + n ) inL 1 . Using that ∫ f n is a subadditive sequence of extended-real numbers, it is an easy exercise to show that 1 n ∫ f n converges asn→∞toL:= inf n 1 n ∫ f n (which can be−∞). Letf \[ ,f \] :X→\[−∞,∞) be the measurable functions defined by f \[ = lim inf n→∞ f n n , f \] = lim sup n→∞ f n n . Date: January, 2009. A. A. is partially supported by a Clay Research Fellowship. J. B. is partially supported by CNPq–Brazil. 1 2A. AVILA AND J. BOCHI The plan of the proof is this: We will show that (3) ∫ f \[ ≥L≥ ∫ f \] . In fact, the first inequality is the key one, and the second will be obtained as a consequence. Thus we obtainf \[ =f \] a.e., at least in the caseL >−∞. The same is true in the caseL=−∞by a simple truncation procedure, which allows us to conclude. To begin the proof, notice that f \[ (x)≤lim inf n→∞ f 1 (x) +f n−1 (Tx) n =f \[ (Tx); henceT −1 ({f \[ ≥a})⊂ {f \[ ≥a}for eacha∈Rand thereforef \[ ◦T=f \[ a.e. Similarly forf \] . Now let us prove the first part of (3); it fact we show: Lemma 1. ∫ f \[ =L. Proof.We will first consider the case where (4)there existsC∈Rsuch thatf n ≥−Cnfor alln. By Fatou’s Lemma,f \[ is integrable, with ∫ f \[ ≤L. Fixε >0 and consider the following increasing sequence of sets: E k = { x;∃j∈{1,...,k}s.t. f j (x) j < f \[ (x) +ε } , k∈N + . We have ⋃ k E k =X. Define an integrable function ψ k = { f \[ +εinE k , f 1 inE c k . The heart of the proof is the following inequality: (5)f n (x)≤ n−k−1 ∑ i=0 ψ k (T i x) + n−1 ∑ i=n−k (ψ k ∨f 1 )(T i x),for a.e.xand alln≥k. To see this, fix a pointxalong whose orbit the functionf \[ is constant. Define a sequence of integers m 0 ≤n 1 < m 1 ≤n 2 < m 2 ≤··· inductively as follows: Setm 0 = 0. Letn j be the least integer greater or equal thanm j−1 such thatT n j xbelongs to the setE k . By definition of this set, we can choosem j such that 1≤m j −n j ≤kand (6)f m j −n j (T n j x)≤(m j −n j )(f \[ (x) +ε). Now, givenn≥k, let\`be the biggest integer such thatm \` ≤n. Using subadditiv- ity, we write (7)f n (x)≤ ∑ f 1 (T i x) + \` ∑ j=1 f m j −n j (T n j x), where the first sum is over alliin the set ⋃ \`−1 j=0 \[m j ,n j+1 )∪\[m \` ,n). Each term f 1 (T i x) withi∈ ⋃ \`−1 j=0 \[m j ,n j+1 )∪\[m \` ,n \`+1 ∧n) equalsψ k (T i x) (becauseT i x∈E c k ). ON THE SUBADDITIVE ERGODIC THEOREM3 On the other hand, using (6), invariance off \[ along the orbit, and the fact that ψ k ≥f \[ +ε, we get f m j −n j (T n j x)≤ ∑ i∈\[n j ,m j ) (f \[ (T i x) +ε)≤ ∑ i∈\[n j ,m j ) ψ k (T i x). Thus (7) becomes f n (x)≤ n \`+1 ∧n−1 ∑ i=0 ψ k (T i x) + n−1 ∑ i=n \`+1 f 1 (T i x). Sincen \`+1 > n−k, (5) follows. Integrating (5), we get ∫ f n ≤(n−k) ∫ ψ k +k ∫ (ψ k ∨f 1 ). Dividing bynand makingn→∞, we getL≤ ∫ ψ k . Then makingk→∞, we getL≤ ∫ f \[ +ε. Since ε >0 is arbitrary, we conclude that the lemma holds under the assumption (4). Now let us consider the general case. ForC∈R, define functions (8)f (C) n =f n ∨(−Cn). Then the sequencef (C) n is subadditive and (9)f (C) \[ := lim inf n→∞ f (C) n n =f \[ ∨(−C), f (C) \] := lim sup n→∞ f (C) n n =f \] ∨(−C). Therefore, using the Monotone Convergence Theorem and the part of the lemma already obtained, we get (10) ∫ f \[ = inf C ∫ f (C) \[ = inf C inf n 1 n ∫ f (C) n = inf n inf C 1 n ∫ f (C) n = inf n 1 n ∫ f n =L. Lemma 2.Letg:X→Rbe an integrable function. Theng◦T n /n→0a.e. as n→∞. This is usually presented as a consequence of Birkhoff’s Theorem; but we provide a simple proof that does not rely on it: Proof.It suffices to show that for everyε >0, the set ofx∈Xsuch that|g(T n x)|≥ εnfor infinitely manyn∈Nhas zero measure. This follows from the Borel–Cantelli Lemma: ∞ ∑ n=1 μ{|g◦T n |≥εn}= ∞ ∑ n=1 μ{|g|≥εn}= ∞ ∑ n=1 ∞ ∑ k=n μ{k≤ε −1 |g|< k+ 1} = ∞ ∑ k=1 k μ{k≤ε −1 |g|< k+ 1}≤ ∫ {|g|>ε} ε −1 |g|<∞. Lemma 3.For anyk∈N + , lim sup n→∞ f kn n =klim sup n→∞ f n n a.e. Proof.The≤inequality is obvious, so let us prove the reverse one. Fixk. For each n∈N + , writen=km n +r n and 1≤r n ≤k. By subadditivity, f n ≤f km n +g◦T km n ,whereg=f + 1 ∨···∨f + k . Asn→∞, we havem n →∞; more preciselym n /n→1/k. Sinceg∈L 1 , Lemma 2 givesg◦T km n /n→0 a.e. The result follows. 4A. AVILA AND J. BOCHI Now let us prove the second part of (3); as mentioned, the idea is to deduce it from the first part. Again we first consider the case where (4) holds. Fixk∈N + . LetF n be then-th Birkhoff sum of−f k with respect toT k , that is,− ∑ n−1 j=0 f k ◦T jk . Then the sequenceF n is additive with respect toT k . Moreover,F 1 =−f k ≤Ck, soF + 1 ∈L 1 . LettingF \[ = lim infF n /n, Lemma 1 gives ∫ F \[ ≥lim 1 n ∫ F n . By invariance, ∫ F n n =− ∫ f k . On the other hand, using Lemma 3, −F \[ = lim sup n→∞ 1 n n−1 ∑ j=0 f k ◦T jk ≥lim sup n→∞ f kn n =klim sup n→∞ f n n =kf \] . Thus ∫ f \] ≤ − 1 k ∫ F \[ ≤ 1 k ∫ f k . This holds for everyk; hence we proved that ∫ f \] ≤Lunder assumption (4). Now we deal with the general case. Again considerf (C) n as in (8). By what we have already proved, the functionsf (C) \[ andf (C) \] defined by (9) have the same integral, and thus they coincide almost everywhere. Sincef (C) \[ →f \[ andf (C) \] →f \] asC→+∞, it follows thatf \[ =f \] a.e. This concludes the proof of Kingman’s Theorem. 3.Comments Lemma 1 by itself immediately implies Birkhoff’s Theorem: applying it to−f 1 we get ∫ f \] ≤Land thusf \[ =f \] a.e. Also notice that the proof of the lemma wouldn’t get any simpler under the assumption of additivity. Thus our proof of Kingman’s Theorem is a modified proof of Birkhoff’s, where the last inequality ∫ f \] ≤Lis deduced directly from ∫ f \[ ≥L. Except perhaps for that step, the other ingredients are not significantly new. Among the simplest proofs of Birkhoff’s and Kingman’s theorems that can be found in the literature we have those of \[KeP\] and \[St\], respectively. The former also es- tablishes the equalityf \[ =f \] a.e. by showing that ∫ f \[ ≥L. Our key inequality (5) is essentially contained in \[St\], and \[KeP\] is based on a similar estimate. Trun- cation, as in (8), appears in both papers. In fact, these approaches are descended from \[KzW\] – which in turn uses ideas of \[Km\]. Let us mention that \[Sc\] also obtains Kingman’s Theorem (in fact, a generaliza- tion of it) without using Birkhoff’s Theorem. This note arose from a series of lectures on Lyapunov exponents we gave at the School and Workshop on Dynamical Systems in the ICTP (Trieste), 2008. We thank L. F. N. Fran ̧ca for useful comments. References \[B\]G. D. Birkhoff. Proof of the ergodic theorem.Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 17:656–660, 1931. \[KzW\] Y. Katznelson and B. Weiss. A simple proof of some ergodic theorems.Israel J. Math., 42(4):291–296, 1982. \[KeP\] M. Keane and K. Petersen. Easy and nearly simultaneous proofs of the ergodic theorem and maximal ergodic theorem. InDynamics & stochastics, volume 48 ofIMS Lecture Notes Monogr. Ser., pages 248–251. Inst. Math. Statist., Beachwood, OH, 2006. \[Km\]T. Kamae. A simple proof the ergodic theorem using non-standard analysis.Israel J. Math., 42(4):284–290, 1982. \[Ki\]J. F. C. Kingman. The ergodic theory of subadditive stochastic processes.J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B, 30:499–510, 1968. ON THE SUBADDITIVE ERGODIC THEOREM5 \[Sc\]K. Sch ̈urger. Almost subadditive extensions of Kingman’s ergodic theorem.Ann. Probab., 19(4):1575–1586, 1991. \[St\]J. M. Steele. Kingman’s subadditive ergodic theorem.Ann. Inst. H. Poincar ́e Probab. Statist., 25(1):93–98, 1989. CNRS UMR 7599, Laboratoire de Probabilit ́ es et Mod \` eles al ́ eatoires, Universit ́ e de Paris VI, FRANCE Current address: IMPA, Estrada Dona Castorina, 110, 22460-320, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, BRAZIL URL:www.impa.br/∼avila E-mail address:artur@math.sunysb.edu Departamento de Matem ́ atica, Pontif ́ ıcia Universidade Cat ́ olica do Rio de Janeiro, Rua Mq. S. Vicente, 225, 22453-900, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, BRAZIL URL:www.mat.puc-rio.br/∼jairo E-mail address:jairo@mat.puc-rio.br