ENTROPY OF PHYSICAL MEASURES FORC вҲһ SMOOTH SYSTEMS DAVID BURGUET Abstract.For aC вҲһ map on a compact manifold we prove that for a Lebesgue randomly picked pointxthere is an empirical measure fromxwith entropy larger than or equal to the sum of positive Lyapunov exponents atx. This contrasts with the well-known Ruelle inequality. As a consequence we give some refinement of TsujiiвҖҷs work \[22\] relating physical and Sinai-Ruelle-Bowen measures. Introduction Entropy is a master invariant in dynamical systems, which estimates the dynamical complexity by counting the separated orbits. For a differentiable system other dynamical quantities of high interest are the Lyapunov ex- ponents. They are given by the exponential growth rate of the derivative. Heuristically the first derivative controls the separation of points (as in the mean value inequality) so that the entropy is always less than or equal to the (sum of positive) Lyapunov exponents. This inequality, due to Ruelle \[19\], holds at any invariant measure. Moreover the case of equality characterizes the so-called Sinai-Ruelle-Bowen measures forC 1+Оұ systems. Here we use a slightly different framework. We do not consider entropy and Lyapunov exponent defined on invariant measures but on points. For the entropy we leth(x) be the supremum entropy of the empirical measures at a given pointx. We may also define a pointwise sum of positive Lyapunov exponents, denoted by ОЈПҮ + (x), by considering the limsup in the exponential growth of the derivative atx(see Section 1 for the precise definitions). We then aim to compareh(x) and ОЈПҮ + (x) вҖқphysicallyвҖқ, i.e. for Lebesgue almost every pointx. For aC вҲһ system we prove quite surprisingly the entropy is physically bounded from below by the sum of positive Lyapunov exponents, i.e. hвүҘОЈПҮ + almost surely. In \[24\] Yomdin introduced tools of semi-algebraic geometry in order to control the local volume growth ofC вҲһ smooth systems. In particular it allows him to show that ShubвҖҷs entropy conjecture holds true in this set- ting. Using a similar approach we manage to control locally not only the volume growth but also the distortion (see also \[5\] and \[6\]). The resulting Date: June 2018. 2010Mathematics Subject Classification.Primary 37C40, 37D25. Key words and phrases.Entropy, Lyapunov exponent, SRB measure, physical measure. 1 arXiv:1812.04308v2 \[math.DS\] 17 Jan 2019 2DAVID BURGUET Reparametrization Lemma of dynamical balls is the key argument in the proof of our Main Theorem. The paper is organized as follows. In the first section we recall the notions of physical, physical-like and Sinai-Ruelle-Bowen measures. We also intro- duce thestrong Lyapunov exponentswhich provide a new way to estimate the exponential growth of the derivative at a point. Our Main Theorem and its Corollaries are stated and discussed in Section 2. The last two sections are devoted to the proof. Finally we present a counter-example in finite smoothness in the appendix. 1.Background 1.1.Physical measures.Let (M,f) be a topological system, i.e.f:MвҶ’ Mis a continuous map on a compact metrizable spaceM. Fix a metricd onM. We letM(M) (resp.M(M,f)) be the set of Borel probability measures (resp.f-invariant). Endowed with the weak-вҲ—topology these sets are compact metrizable spaces. When (ПҶ n :MвҶ’R) nвҲҲN is a dense countable family of the set of real continuous functions onXfor the usual supremum norm then the following convex metricdonM(M) is compatible with the weak-вҲ—topology: вҲҖОј,ОҪвҲҲM(M),d(Ој,ОҪ) := вҲ‘ n вҲЈ вҲЈ вҲ« ПҶ n dОҪвҲ’ вҲ« ПҶ n dОј вҲЈ вҲЈ 2 n (1 + sup x |ПҶ n (x)|) . We will also consider the setKM(M) of all nonempty closed subsets of M(M) with the associated Hausdorff metricd H . The basinB Ој of an invariant measureОјвҲҲ M(M,f) is the set of point xвҲҲMwhose empirical measuresОј x n := 1 n вҲ‘ 0вүӨk<n Оҙ f k x is converging to Ој, whenngoes to infinity. According to Birkhof ergodic theorem the set B Ој has fullОј-measure for an ergodic measureОј. In the following we will always consider aC вҲһ smooth compact Riemannian manifold (M,вҖ–В·вҖ–) and its induced Riemannian distanced. The (normalized) volume form inherited from the Riemannian structure will be called the Lebesgue measure and is denoted by Leb. An invariant measure is saidphysicalwhen its basin has positive Lebesgue measure. From the works of Sinai, Ruelle and Bowen \[21, 19, 4\] it is known that anyC 2 Axiom A diffeomorphism admits finitely many ergodic physical measures such that the union of their basin has full Lebesgue measure. We recall now the concept of physical-like measures \[7, 8\]. ForxвҲҲMwe letpw(x)вҠӮM(M,f) be the accumulation points of the empirical measures (Ој x n ) n atx. An invariant measureОјвҲҲM(M,f) is saidphysical-likewhen for any >0 the set{x,d(Ој,pw(x))< }has positive Lebesgue measure (in particular the physical measures are physical-like). The setPL=PL(Leb) of physical-like measures is the smallest compact subset of measures con- tainingpw(x) for Lebesgue almost every pointxвҲҲM. In other terms if one ENTROPY OF PHYSICAL MEASURES FORC вҲһ SMOOTH SYSTEMS3 considers the closed valued map pw:XвҶ’ KM(M), x7вҶ’pw(x) and its essential rangeIm Leb (pw) then we have (see Appendix B) PL= вӢғ KвҲҲIm(pw) K. Instead of the Lebesgue measure we may consider any other Borel measure mand define similarlyPL(m) as the smallest compact subset of measures containingpw(x) form-almost every pointxвҲҲM. We letPL(m) be the set with fullm-measure given by pointsxвҲҲMwithpw(x)вҲҲ Im m (pw) (in particularpw(x)вҠӮ PL(m). Whenmis absolutely continuous with respect to another Borel measurem вҖІ thenPL(m) is a subset ofPL(m вҖІ ). For a subsetEofMwith Leb(E)>0 we let Leb E be the probability measure induced onE. In particular we havePL(Leb E )вҠӮ PL(Leb F ) for subsets EвҠӮF. 1.2.Lyapunov exponents.In this section we consider aC 1 diffeomor- phismfofM. We recall some background on Lyapunov exponents (see \[1\] for further details), which estimate the exponential growth innof the derivativedf n on the tangent bundleTMofM. 1.2.1.Lyapunov exponents of a point.The (forward) Lyapunov exponent of (x,v)вҲҲTM\\{0}is defined as follows ПҮ(f,x,v) := lim sup nвҶ’+вҲһ 1 n logвҖ–d x f n (v)вҖ–. The functionПҮ(x,В·) :=ПҮ(f,x,В·) admits only finitely many valuesПҮ 1 (x)> ... > ПҮ p(x) (x) onTM\\{0}and generates a filtration 0(V p(x) (x)(В·В·В·( V 1 =T x MwithV i (x) ={vвҲҲTM, ПҮ(x,v)вүӨПҮ i (x)}. The functionpas well the vector spacesV i (x),i= 1,...,p(x) depend Borel measurably onx. We letПҮ(x) be the maximal Lyapunov exponent atx: ПҮ(x) := max i ПҮ i (x) =max (x,v)вҲҲTM\\{0} ПҮ(x,v). For any positive integerkless than or equal to the dimensiondofM we may define similarly the maximal Lyapunov exponentПҮ k of the map Оӣ k dfinduced bydfon thek-exterior bundle Оӣ k TM. In particular we have ПҮ 1 =ПҮ. Finally we put for allxвҲҲM: ОЈПҮ + (x) = max ( 0,ПҮ 1 (x),В·В·В·,ПҮ d (x) ) . A point is said(forward) Lyapunov regularwhenПҮ k (x) = вҲ‘ k i=1 ПҮ i (x) for all 1вүӨkвүӨd. By Oseledets theorem \[15\] the set of Lyapunov regular points has fullОј-measure for any invariant measureОј. However we are here mostly interested in the typical dynamical behaviour with respect to the Lebesgue measure (which is a priori not invariant). In particular it may 4DAVID BURGUET happen that the set of Lyapunov regular points has not full Lebesgue mea- sure ( see e.g. \[16\] for the eight attractor). We will never assume Lyapunov regularity in the present paper. We letОЈПҮ + (resp.ПҮ k fork= 1,В·В·В·,d) be the essential supremum of ОЈПҮ + (resp.ПҮ k ) with respect to the Lebesgue measure, in particular ОЈПҮ + = max(0,ПҮ 1 ,В·В·В·,ПҮ d ). Based on YomdinвҖҷs theory and the volume growth estimates due to Newhouse, Koslowski \[10\] showed an integral for- mula for the topological entropy of aC вҲһ smooth system. This equality may be written as follows: h top (f) = lim n 1 n log вҲ« max k вҖ–Оӣ k d x f n вҖ–dLeb(x). By JensenвҖҷs inequality we have for all integersn log вҲ« max k вҖ–Оӣ k d x f n вҖ–dLeb(x)вүҘ вҲ« log max k вҖ–Оӣ k d x f n вҖ–dLeb(x). According to Borel-Cantelli Lemma, for allОі >0, the set{xвҲҲM,max k вҖ–Оӣ k d x f n вҖ–вүҘ e n( ОЈПҮ + вҲ’Оі) }has Lebesgue measure larger thane вҲ’nОі for infinitely manyn. Therefore we conclude that (1.1)h top (f)вүҘlim sup n 1 n вҲ« log max k вҖ–Оӣ k d x f n вҖ–dLeb(x)вүҘОЈПҮ + . 1.2.2.Lyapunov exponents of invariants measures.For an invariant measure Ојwe let fori= 1,...,d ПҮ i (Ој) := вҲ« ПҮ i (x)dОј(x) and ПҮ + i (Ој) := вҲ« max (0,ПҮ i (x))dОј(x). For a sequence of real numbers (a n ) n we let lim вҶҳ n a n the limit innof the sequence (a n ) n when the sequence is converging to inf n a n . The maxi- mal Lyapunov exponentПҮ(Ој) = max i ПҮ i (Ој) and its positive partПҮ + (Ој) = max i ПҮ + i (Ој) satisfy ПҮ(Ој) = вҶҳ lim n 1 n вҲ« logвҖ–d x f n вҖ–dОј(x) and ПҮ + (Ој) = вҶҳ lim n 1 n вҲ« log + вҖ–d x f n вҖ–dОј(x). Similarly the sum ОЈПҮ + (Ој) = вҲ‘ i ПҮ + i (Ој) of all the positive Lyapunov expo- nents ofОјsatisfies ОЈПҮ + (Ој) = вҶҳ lim n 1 n вҲ« log + max k вҖ–Оӣ k d x f n вҖ–dОј(x). ENTROPY OF PHYSICAL MEASURES FORC вҲһ SMOOTH SYSTEMS5 WhenОјis ergodic, we get from the subadditive ergodic theorem for alli andОј-almost everyx ПҮ i (x) =ПҮ i (Ој), ПҮ(Ој) =ПҮ(x) = lim n 1 n logвҖ–d x f n вҖ–, ОЈПҮ + (Ој) = ОЈПҮ + (x) = lim n 1 n log + max k вҖ–Оӣ k d x f n вҖ–. The functionsОј7вҶ’ПҮ(Ој),ПҮ + (Ој),ОЈПҮ + (Ој) define upper semicontinuous fonc- tions onM(M,f) (see e.g. \[3\]). We recall that for aC 1 diffeomorphism RuelleвҖҷs inequality \[19\] gives the following upperbound of the metric entropyh(Ој) of an invariant measureОј h(Ој)вүӨОЈПҮ + (Ој). An ergodic measure is saidhyperbolicwhen any of its Lyapunov expo- nent is nonzero. 1.2.3.Strong Lyapunov exponents.In this paragraph we introduce a new kind of pointwise Lyapunov exponents which is related with the Lyapunov exponents of the empirical measures. We define thestrong positive max- imal Lyapunov exponentas follows. First we let for allpвүҘ1 and for all xвҲҲM О» p (x) := lim sup n 1 n n вҲ‘ l=0 log + вҖ–d f l x f p вҖ–. Clearly we have 1 p О» p (x)вүҘПҮ + (x) by submultiplicativity of the norm. More- over the sequence (О» p (x)) p is a subadditive sequence. Then we let for all xвҲҲM О»(x) := вҶҳ lim p 1 p О» p (x)вүҘПҮ + (x). Lemma 1.Let(M,f)be aC 1 dynamical system. Then we have for all xвҲҲM sup ОјвҲҲpw(x) ПҮ + (Ој) =О»(x). Proof.LetxвҲҲM. LetОј= lim k Ој x n k вҲҲpw(x) for an increasing sequence of integers (n k ) k . For allnandpwe have вҲ« log + вҖ–d y f p вҖ–dОј x n (y) = 1 n n вҲ‘ l=0 log + вҖ–d f l x f p вҖ–. Taking the limit overn=n k whenkgoes to infinity we get вҲ« log + вҖ–d y f p вҖ– p dОј(y)вүӨ О» p (x) p and by taking the limit whenpgoes to infinity we have finally sup ОјвҲҲpw(x) ПҮ + (Ој)вүӨО»(x). 6DAVID BURGUET Let us now show sup ОјвҲҲpw(x) ПҮ + (Ој)вүҘО»(x). For anypthere exist a subse- quence (n k,p ) k such that О» p (x) = lim k 1 n k,p n k,p вҲ‘ l=0 log + вҖ–d f l x f p вҖ–. Then ifОј p вҲҲpw(x) is a weak limit of (Ој x n k,p ) k we have вҲ« log + вҖ–d y f p вҖ–dОј p (y) =О» p (x). For anyОјвҲҲM(M,f) and for anyzвҲҲX, the sequences ( вҲ« log + вҖ–d y f p вҖ–dОј(y) ) p and (О» p (z)) p being both subadditive the termsПҮ + (Ој) andО»(z) are respec- tively the limits of the nonincreasing sequences ( вҲ« log + вҖ–d y f p k вҖ–dОј(y) p k ) k and ( О» p k (z) p k ) k for any increasing sequence of integers (p k ) k withp k |p k+1 for all k. Fix such a sequence (p k ) k . We get : sup ОјвҲҲpw(x) ПҮ + (Ој)=sup ОјвҲҲpw(x) inf p вҲ« log + вҖ–d y f p вҖ– p dОј(y), =sup ОјвҲҲpw(x) inf k вҲ« log + вҖ–d y f p k вҖ– p k dОј(y), Proposition 2.4 in \[2\] =inf k sup ОјвҲҲpw(x) вҲ« log + вҖ–d y f p k вҖ– p k dОј(y), вүҘinf k вҲ« log + вҖ–d y f p k вҖ– p k dОј p k (y), вүҘinf k О» p k (x) p k , sup ОјвҲҲpw(x) ПҮ + (Ој)вүҘinf p О» p (x) p =О»(x).  Similarly we may define thestrong positive sum of Lyapunov expo- nentsas ОЈО»(x) := вҶҳ lim p lim sup n 1 np n вҲ‘ l=0 log + max k вҖ–Оӣ k df p вҖ– f l x вүҘОЈПҮ + (x). Following the above proof we get in a similar way : Lemma 2.Let(M,f)be aC 1 dynamical system. Then we have for all xвҲҲM ОЈО»(x) = sup ОјвҲҲpw(x) ОЈПҮ + (Ој). ENTROPY OF PHYSICAL MEASURES FORC вҲһ SMOOTH SYSTEMS7 A pointxis said to beregularwhen we have ОЈО»(x) = ОЈПҮ + (x)>0. For an ergodic measureОј, almost every pointxwith respect toОјlies in the basinB Ој ofОј(in other termspw(x) =Ој) and ОЈПҮ + (x) = ОЈПҮ + (Ој). Using the ergodic decomposition it follows then from Lemma 2 : Lemma 3.Regular points have full measure with respect to any invariant measure. However as already said we are interested in empirical measures with Lebesgue typical initial conditions and we do not assume there exists an invariant measure absolutely continuous with respect to Leb. We denote by ОЈО»the essential supremum of ОЈО»with respect to Leb. As the setPL:= PL(Leb) has full Lebesgue measure we have ОЈО»вүӨsup xвҲҲPL ОЈО»(x) and then it follows from Lemma 2 and ОЈО»вүҘОЈПҮ + that : ОЈПҮ + вүӨsup ОјвҲҲPL ОЈПҮ + (Ој). In general the equality does not hold as it can be seen again on the eight attractor \[16, 12\], where we have 0 =ОЈПҮ + < ПҮ + (Оҙ S ) = sup ОјвҲҲPL ОЈПҮ + (Ој) withSbeing the associated saddle hyperbolic point. 1.3.Sinai-Ruelle-Bowen measures.We consider here aC 1+Оұ diffeomor- phismfofM. An invariant measureОјis said to be aSinai-Ruelle-Bowen measure(SRB measure for short) whenОј-almost every point has a positive Lyapunov exponent and the disintegration ofОјalong the unstable manifolds is absolutely continuous with respect to the volume on the unstable mani- folds inherited from the Riemanian structure onM. From Pesin theory any ergodic hyperbolic SRB measure is physical \[17\]. For an invariant measureОјof aC 1+Оұ diffeomorphism we letT Ој be the set of (forward) Lyapunov regular pointsxin the basinB Ој ofОјwithПҮ i (x) =ПҮ i (Ој) for alli. In particular any pointxinT Ој satisfies ОЈПҮ + (x) = вҲ‘ i max(0,ПҮ i (x)) = ОЈПҮ + (Ој) and therefore any such point is regular in our sense. Tsujii showed that there exists an SRB measure when the union ofT Ој over all ergodic hyperbolic measures has positive Lebesgue measure. He also proved that an ergodic hyperbolic measureОјis an SRB measure if and only ifT Ој has positive Lebesgue measure. Ledrappier and Young \[11\] (see also \[18\] for the noninvertible version) gave a thermodynamical characterization of SRB measures : they are exactly the invariant measures with a positive Lyapunov exponent almost everywhere satisfying the so-called Pesin formula : h(Ој) = вҲ« вҲ‘ i ПҮ + i (x)dОј(x). In particular any SRB measure has positive entropy. It is thus hyperbolic when considering a surface diffeomorphism. The set of SRB measures is a 8DAVID BURGUET face of the Choquet simplex of invariant measures, i.e. the ergodic compo- nents of a SRB measure are also SRB measures. As a direct consequence of the aforementioned results we have for anyC 1+Оұ surface diffeomorphism : sup ОјSRB h(Ој)вүӨsup Ојphysical h(Ој), вүӨsup Ојphysical ПҮ(Ој), вүӨПҮ. Question.Do we have sup ОјвҲҲPL h(Ој)вүӨ ПҮfor aC 1 (resp.C 1+Оұ ,C вҲһ ) surface diffeomorphism? 2.Statements We aim to compare the entropy of physical-like measures with the (strong) positive sum of Lyapunov exponents forC вҲһ systems. Main Theorem.Letf:MвҶ’Mbe aC вҲһ map. Then for Lebesgue almost every pointxthere existsОј x вҲҲpw(x)with (ОЈО»(x)вүҘ)h(Ој x )вүҘОЈПҮ + (x). Of course the inequality does not hold true for allx, e.g. whenxis a periodic point with a positive Lyapunov exponent. However the set of such points has zero Lebesgue measure. Remark 1.For aC 2 Axiom A diffeomorphismf:MвҶ’M, there are finitely many ergodic physical measures whose basins cover a set of full Lebesgue measure. Such measures also satisfies Pesin formula. In this case we have moreoverОЈПҮ + (x) = вҲ« log Jac(df| E u )(x)dОј(x)forxвҲҲ B Ој by conti- nuity ofx7вҶ’Jac(df| E u )(x). Therefore for Lebesgue almost every pointxwe geth(Ој x ) = ОЈПҮ + (x)withpw(x) ={Ој x }. As a direct consequence of the Main Theorem we obtain the following lower bound on the entropy of a physical measure. Corollary 2.LetОјbe a physical measure of aC вҲһ mapf:MвҶ’M. Then h(Ој)вүҘ ОЈПҮ + | B Ој , whereОЈПҮ + | B Ој is the essential supremum ofОЈПҮ + onB Ој . The Main Theorem and Corollary 2 are wrong in finite smoothness. We give in the Appendix A an example of aC r smooth interval map for any finiterвүҘ1 with a Dirac physical measure at a source such that the essential supremum of the Lyapunov exponent on its basin is positive. We recover Inequality (1.1) obtained from Kozlovski integral formula. More precisely we have : ENTROPY OF PHYSICAL MEASURES FORC вҲһ SMOOTH SYSTEMS9 Corollary 3.Letf:MвҶ’Mbe aC вҲһ map. Then max ОјвҲҲPL h(Ој)вүҘ ОЈПҮ + . Proof.For any >0 the set{ОЈПҮ + >ОЈПҮ + вҲ’}has positive Lebesgue measure, so that there exists a pointxin this set withpw(x)вҠӮ PLwhich satisfies the conclusion of the Main Theorem, i.e. there existОј x вҲҲpw(x) with h(Ој x )вүҘОЈПҮ + (x)> ОЈПҮ + вҲ’. We conclude by upper semicontinuity of the metric entropy forC вҲһ maps \[14\] and by compactness ofPL. ForC вҲһ maps we get the following refinement of TsujiiвҖҷs theorem. Corollary 4.Letf:MвҶ’Mbe aC вҲһ map. (1)Assume the set of regular points in{ОЈПҮ + >0}has positive Lebesgue measure. Thenfadmits an SRB measure. (2)LetОјbe a physical measure such that the set of regular points in {ОЈПҮ + >0}вҲ©B Ој has positive Lebesgue measure. ThenОјis an SRB measure. We recall TsujiiвҖҷs results only deal with diffeomorphisms but under the weakerC 1+Оұ smoothness assumption. Contrarily to TsujiiвҖҷs statement we do not assume in the second item neither ergodicity nor hyperbolicity of the physical measureОј. Proof.We only prove the first item. The proof of the second one follows the same lines. According to the Main Theorem, for Lebesgue almost everyx in{ОЈПҮ + = ОЈО» >0}there is an SRB measureОј x вҲҲpw(x) satisfying h(Ој x )вүҘОЈПҮ + (x). Moreover it follows from RuelleвҖҷs inequality and Lemma 2 that ОЈО»(x)вүҘОЈПҮ + (Ој x )вүҘh(Ој x ). Since we have ОЈПҮ + (x) = ОЈО»(x) the measureОј x satisifes PesinвҖҷs entropy formula and is therefore an SRB measure. Unlike the Main Theorem, which is false in finite smoothness, we conjec- ture Corollary 4 holds true for anyC 1+Оұ map. It can be deduced from the Reparametrization Lemma in \[5\] the case ofC 1+Оұ interval maps and surface diffeomorphisms. However as it involves stronger technicalities we prefer to only considerC вҲһ maps in the present paper. Observe also that theC вҲһ asumption does not imply that the basin of an ergodic physical measure contains a positive Lebesgue measure subset of regular points. If we consider again the eight attractor of Bowen \[12\] the strong Lyapunov exponent ОЈО»(x) is equal to the unstable Lyapunov exponent of the saddle physical measure, whereas according to our Main Theorem we have ОЈПҮ + (x) = 0 for Lebesgue almost every point in the basin. 10DAVID BURGUET 3.Some technical lemmas For aC 2 Anosov surface diffeomorphism one build SRB measures as fol- lows. One takes the inherited Lebesgue measureОјon a local unstable man- ifold and then checks that the limitОҪof ( 1 n вҲ‘ 0вүӨk<n f k Ој ) n disintegrates absolutely continuously on unstable manifolds with respect to the Lebesgue measure. Here we follow somehow a similar approach by considering the Lebesgue measureОјon a smooth disc with Lebesgue typical exponential growth. Then we estimate the entropy ofОҪby using aReparametrization Lemmaof dynamical balls. 3.1.Lyapunov exponent along smooth leaves.In the Lemma below we select the appropriate smooth disc. Lemma 4.Let1вүӨkвүӨdand leta < ПҮ k . We consider a Borel subsetEof {a < ПҮ k }with positive Lebesgue measure. Then there exist a compact subset FofEand a foliation boxUwith respect to aC вҲһ smoothk-foliationF withLeb(UвҲ©F)>0such that вҲҖxвҲҲUвҲ©F, ПҮ k (x,T x F)> a, whereT x Fdenotes any unit-norm element ofОӣ k (TM)generating the tan- gent space atxof theF-leaf containingx. Proof.We may assumek= 1 without loss of generality. LetFbe a compact subset ofEwith Leb(F)>0 such thatx7вҶ’V i (x) is continuous onF for alli, where (V i (x)) i denote the Lyapunov subspaces atx. Letxbe a Lebesgue density point ofFand letuвҲҲV 1 (x)\\ ( вӢғ iвүҘ2 V i (x) ) . We denote the exponential map atxby exp x :T x MвҶ’M. Then for a small enough neighborhoodUofxthe vector (dexp x (u)) y belongs toV 1 (y)\\ ( вӢғ iвүҘ2 V i (y) ) for allyвҲҲUвҲ©F. Finally this vector generates the tangent space atyof the foliationF= exp x (F x ) whereF x is the foliation inu-directed lines of T x M. 3.2.Entropy computation.We state now a technical entropy computa- tion due to Misiurewicz \[13\] in its elementary proof of the variational prin- ciple for the entropy, which we will use to bound from below the entropy of ОҪ. For a probability space (X,B,Ој) and a finite measurable partitionPof Xwe denote the static entropy ofPas follows H Ој (P) :=вҲ’ вҲ‘ AвҲҲP Ој(A) logОј(A). Lemma 5.\[13\]Let(X,f)be a Borel system. We consider a sequence(Ој n ) n of probability Borel measures onXand the associated sequence(ОҪ n ) n given for alln >0byОҪ n = 1 n вҲ‘ 0вүӨk<n f k Ој n . Then we have withP n = вҲЁ nвҲ’1 k=0 f вҲ’k P вҲҖm >0, 1 m H ОҪ n (P m )вүҘ 1 n (H Ој n (P n )вҲ’3mlog\]P). ENTROPY OF PHYSICAL MEASURES FORC вҲһ SMOOTH SYSTEMS11 3.3.Local distortion.The key argument which allows to control the dis- tortion is given by the following lemma whose proof relies on tools of semi- algebraic geometry. ForxвҲҲM,nвҲҲNandОұ >0 we letB f (x,n,Оұ) be the dynamical ball atxof lengthnand sizeОұ: B f (x,n,Оұ) :={yвҲҲM,d(f l x,f l y)< Оұforl= 0,...,nвҲ’1}. Reparametrization Lemma.Letf:MвҶ’Mbe aC вҲһ map. LetaвҲҲR, ОівҲҲR + \\{0}and letkbe a positive integer withkвүӨd. For someОұ >0, for allxвҲҲMand for allПғ: \[0,1\] k вҶ’Mof classC вҲһ withвҖ–dПғвҖ– вүӨ1and Оӣ k d t Пғ6= 0for alltвҲҲ\[0,1\] k , there exists for large enoughn(depending on Пғbut not onx) a family of reparametrizations(Оё n i : \[0,1\] k ) iвҲҲI n with the following properties: вҖў вӢғ iвҲҲI n Im(Оё n i )c вҲ— { tвҲҲ\[0,1\] k , вҖ–Оӣ k d t (f n в—ҰПғ)вҖ– вҖ–Оӣ k d t ПғвҖ– вүҘe na andПғ(t)вҲҲB(x,n,Оұ) } , вҖў вҲҖiвҲҲI n ,вҖ–d(f n в—ҰПғв—ҰОё n i )вҖ–вүӨ1, вҖў вҲҖiвҲҲI n вҲҖt,t вҖІ вҲҲIm(Оё n i ), вҖ–Оӣ k d t (f n в—ҰПғ)вҖ– вҖ–Оӣ k d t вҖІ (f n в—ҰПғ)вҖ– вүӨ2, вҖў\]I n вүӨe Оіn . Such Reparametrizations Lemmas first appear in the pioneering work of Yomdin \[24\] (see also \[9\]) in his proof of ShubвҖҷs entropy conjecture forC вҲһ systems. In YomdinвҖҷs earlier form the control of the distortion given by the third item did not appear. Moreover the reparametrized set was the whole dynamical ball (here this is the case whenfis a local diffeomorphim by choosingasmall enough). Others similar forms of the Reparametrization Lemma were used succesfully by the author to study symbolic extensions and exponential growth of periodic points forC r surface diffeomorphisms \[5, 6\]. The technical proof could be skipped at a first reading. We first establish a version of the Reparametrization Lemma for aC вҲһ nonautonomous systemF= (f l :BвҶ’R d ) lвҲҲN on the unit Euclidean ballBof R d . FormвҲҲNwe letF m be the finite sequence ofC вҲһ mapsF m := (f l ) 0вүӨl<m . In this context we define the dynamical ballB F m as follows B F m :={yвҲҲB,f l в—ҰВ·В·В·в—Ұf 0 (y)вҲҲBfor 0вүӨl < m}. We then putf m+1 =f m в—ҰВ·В·В·в—Ұf 0 :B F m вҶ’R d (let alsof 0 be the identity map ofR d ). LetA= (a l ) lвҲҲN be an infinite sequence of integers. For the corresponding finite sequencesA m := (a 0 ,...,a mвҲ’1 ) we also consider the following dynam- ical ball induced byF m on thek-exterior bundle of the tangent spaceTR d endowed with the norm induced by the Euclidean norm: B k (A m ) :={(y,v)вҲҲОӣ k (TR d ),вҖ–vвҖ–= 1, yвҲҲB F m andвҲҖl= 0,...,mвҲ’1,dlogвҖ–Оӣ k d f l y f l (v l )вҖ–e=a l }, вҲ— By вӢғ iвҲҲI A i cBwe mean that вӢғ iвҲҲI A i вҠғBandA i вҲ©B6=вҲ…for alliвҲҲI. 12DAVID BURGUET with the notationsv l = Оӣ k d y f l (v) вҖ–Оӣ k d y f l (v)вҖ– ,l= 0,...,mвҲ’1, anddВ·efor the ceiling function. For aC вҲһ smoothk-discs: \[0,1\] k вҶ’R d we aim to reparametrize the set C s (A n ) defined as follows : C s (A m ) = { tвҲҲ\[0,1\] k , ( s(t), Оӣ k d t s вҖ–Оӣ k d t sвҖ– ) вҲҲB k (A m ) } . Proposition 5.With the above notations there exists, for any integerr >2, a family of reparametrizations(ПҶ m i : \[0,1\] k ) iвҲҲI(A m ) with the following properties : (1) вӢғ iвҲҲI(A m ) Im(ПҶ m i )cC s (A m ), (2)вҲҖiвҲҲI(A m )вҲҖs= 0,...,r, вҖ–d s (f m в—Ұsв—ҰПҶ m i )вҖ–вүӨ1, (3)вҲҖiвҲҲI(A m )вҲҖs= 1,...,rвҲ’1, вҖ–d s ( t7вҶ’Оӣ k d ПҶ m i (t) (f m в—Ұs) ) вҖ–вүӨ 1 2 max uвҲҲ\[0,1\] k вҖ–Оӣ k d ПҶ m i (u) (f m в—Ұs)вҖ–, (4)\]I(A m )вүӨC(r,d) m вҲҸ mвҲ’1 l=0 max ( 1,вҖ–d 0 f l вҖ– k/r , ( max(1,вҖ–Оӣ k d 0 f l вҖ–) e a l ) k rвҲ’1 ) with C(r,d)being a universal function inrandd. Proof.We argue by induction onm. Assume the family (ПҶ m i : \[0,1\] k ) iвҲҲI(A m ) is already built forA m = (a 0 ,В·В·В·,a mвҲ’1 ). We proceed to the induc- tive step by building the required family of reparametrizations with respect toA m+1 = (a 0 ,В·В·В·,a m ). Observe thatвҖ–d s+1 f l вҖ– вүӨОұ s вҖ–d s+1 fвҖ–for alllвҲҲN and 1вүӨsвүӨrвҲ’1. From the formula for the derivatives of a composition and the induction hypothesis we get therefore for small enoughОұ(depending only onвҖ–d s+1 fвҖ–,s= 1,...,rвҲ’1) and for anyПҶ=ПҶ m i : вҖ–d rвҲ’1 ( t7вҶ’Оӣ k d ПҶ(t) (f m+1 в—Ұs) ) вҖ–=вҖ–d rвҲ’1 ( t7вҶ’Оӣ k d f m в—Ұsв—ҰПҶ(t) f m+1 в—ҰОӣ k d ПҶ(t) (f m в—Ұs) ) вҖ–, вүӨA(r,d) max ( 1,вҖ–Оӣ k d 0 f m+1 вҖ– ) max t вҖ–Оӣ k d ПҶ(t) (f m в—Ұs)вҖ– and вҖ–d r ( f m+1 в—Ұsв—ҰПҶ ) вҖ–=вҖ–d rвҲ’1 (d f m в—Ұsв—ҰПҶ f m+1 в—Ұd ПҶ (f m в—Ұs))вҖ–, вүӨA(r,d) max (1,вҖ–d 0 f m+1 вҖ–), for some universal functionAinrandd. We use now the following lemma which is a slightly different version of the Main Lemma in \[9\]. Lemma 6.LetG 0 : \[0,1\] e вҶ’R e вҖІ andG 1 : \[0,1\] e вҶ’R e вҖІвҖІ be respectivelyC r andC s maps. We denote byB e вҖІ andB e вҖІвҖІ the unit Euclidean balls ofR e вҖІ and R e вҖІвҖІ . Then there exists a family(ПҲ j : \[0,1\] e ) jвҲҲJ such that : ENTROPY OF PHYSICAL MEASURES FORC вҲһ SMOOTH SYSTEMS13 вҖў вӢғ jвҲҲJ Im(ПҲ j )cG вҲ’1 0 (B e вҖІ )вҲ©G вҲ’1 1 (B e вҖІвҖІ ), вҖў вҲҖjвҲҲJ вҲҖk= 0,...,r,вҖ–d k (G 0 в—ҰПҲ j )вҖ–вүӨ1, вҖў вҲҖjвҲҲJ вҲҖk= 0,...,s,вҖ–d k (G 1 в—ҰПҲ j )вҖ–вүӨ1/12, вҖў\]J вүӨB(r,s,e,e вҖІ ,e вҖІвҖІ )Г—max ( 1,вҖ–d r G 0 вҖ– e/r ,вҖ–d s G 1 вҖ– e/s ) for some uni- versal functionB. The proof follows the same lines, the unique difference being that one applies the Algebraic Lemma in \[9\] simultaneously to the interpolating poly- nomials ofG 0 andG 1 with respective (maybe distinct) degreesrands. To conclude the inductive step we apply Lemma 6 for everyiвҲҲ I(A m ) with theC rвҲ’1 mapG 1 :s7вҶ’ Оӣ k d ПҶ m i (s) (f m+1 в—Ұs) e a m max uвҲҲ\[0,1\] k вҖ–Оӣ k d ПҶ m i (u) (f m в—Ұs)вҖ– and theC r map G 0 =f m+1 в—Ұsв—ҰПҶ m i (for anytвҲҲIm(ПҶ m i )вҲ©C s (A m+1 ) we haveвҖ–G 1 (t)вҖ– вүӨ 1). We letПҲ j ,jвҲҲ J=J(ПҶ m i ), be the resulting reparametrizations. The mapsПҶ m+1 i,j =ПҶ m i в—ҰПҲ j over all (i,j)вҲҲ I(A m+1 ) :={(i,j), iвҲҲ I(A m ) andjвҲҲ J(ПҶ m i ) with Im(ПҶ m i в—ҰПҲ j )вҲ©C s (A m+1 )6=вҲ…}give the re- quired family of reparametrizations for the (m+ 1) th step. Let us just check the new reparametrizationsПҶ m+1 i,j satisfies (3) for anys= 1,...,rвҲ’1 : вҖ–d s ( t7вҶ’Оӣ k d ПҶ m+1 i,j (t) (f n+1 в—Ұs) ) вҖ–вүӨe a m max uвҲҲ\[0,1\] k вҖ–Оӣ k d ПҶ m i (u) (f m в—Ұs)вҖ–вҖ–d s (G 1 в—ҰПҲ j )вҖ–, вүӨ e a m вҲ’1 4 max uвҲҲ\[0,1\] k вҖ–Оӣ k d ПҶ m i (u) (f m в—Ұs)вҖ–, вүӨ e a m вҲ’1 2 min uвҲҲ\[0,1\] k вҖ–Оӣ k d ПҶ m i (u) (f m в—Ұs)вҖ–. Since we have Im(ПҶ m+1 i,j в—ҰПҲ j )вҲ©C s (A m+1 )6=вҲ…there existsvвҲҲ\[0,1\] k , with вҖ–Оӣ k d ПҶ m+1 i,j (v) (f m+1 в—Ұs)вҖ– вҖ–Оӣ k d ПҶ m+1 i,j (v) (f m в—Ұs)вҖ– вүҘe a m вҲ’1 and therefore вҖ–d s ( t7вҶ’Оӣ k d ПҶ m+1 i,j (t) (f m+1 в—Ұs) ) вҖ–вүӨ e a m вҲ’1 2 вҖ–Оӣ k d ПҶ m+1 i,j (v) (f m в—Ұs)вҖ–, вүӨ 1 2 вҖ–Оӣ k d ПҶ m+1 i,j (v) (f m+1 в—Ұs)вҖ–, вүӨ 1 2 max uвҲҲ\[0,1\] k вҖ–Оӣ k d ПҶ m+1 i,j (u) (f m+1 в—Ұs)вҖ–. This concludes the proof of Proposition 5. A sequenceA m = (a 0 ,В·В·В·,a mвҲ’1 ) is saidA-admissibleforAвҲҲRwhen B k (A m )вҲ©{(y,v)вҲҲОӣ k (TR d ),вҖ–vвҖ–= 1 andвҖ–Оӣ k d y f m (v)вҖ–вүҘe mA }6=вҲ…. In particular we have then вҲ‘ mвҲ’1 l=0 a l вүҘmA. 14DAVID BURGUET LetFbe the real functionR + 3t7вҶ’t \[ t вҲ’1 log(t вҲ’1 ) + (1вҲ’t вҲ’1 ) log(1вҲ’t вҲ’1 ) \] , in particularF(t)вүӨtlog 2 for alltand lim tвҶ’+вҲһ F(t) t = 0. By a standard combinatorial argument (see e.g. Lemma 8 in \[5\]) we have : Lemma 7.LetAвҲҲR. Assume вҲЈ вҲЈ log + вҖ–Оӣ k d 0 f l вҖ–вҲ’log + вҖ–Оӣ k d y f l вҖ– вҲЈ вҲЈ <1for all lвҲҲNandyвҲҲB. Then the numberk n ofA-admissible sequencesA m is bounded from above as follows logk m m вүӨF(О» k (F m ) + 2вҲ’A), whereО» k (F m ) := 1 m вҲ‘ mвҲ’1 l=0 log + вҖ–Оӣ k d 0 f l вҖ– We are now in position to prove the Reparametrization Lemma. Proof of the Reparametrization Lemma.Without loss of generality we can assumea <вҲ’1. Fix thenОі >0 andxвҲҲXand take a positive integerp precised later on. LetN вҲ— 3n=p(mвҲ’1) +qwithm,qвҲҲN вҲ— and 0< qвүӨp. As in the previous works \[24, 9, 5\] we may replace вҖ  Пғbys=Оұ вҲ’1 Пғ(ОұВ·) for Оұ >0 and the local dynamic offaroundxof timenby the nonautonomous systemF m = (f l ) 0вүӨl<m defined on the unit Euclidean ballBofR d byf l = Оұ вҲ’1 f p (f pl x+ОұВ·) for 0вүӨl < mвҲ’1 andf mвҲ’1 =Оұ вҲ’1 f q (f p(mвҲ’1) x+ОұВ·). We assume here without loss of generality thatMis thed-torusR d /Z d andОұ is less than 1 (in general, without an affine structure, one should conjugate fwith the exponential map atf l xto get a mapf l onBвҠӮR d and takeОұ less than the radius of injectivity of (M,вҖ–В·вҖ–). Moreover one has to replace the Euclidean norm by the Riemanian norms along the orbit ofx, in the nonautonomous system). We may takeОұ >0 so small that вҲЈ вҲЈ log + вҖ–Оӣ k d 0 f l вҖ–вҲ’log + вҖ–Оӣ k d y f l вҖ– вҲЈ вҲЈ <1 for all 0вүӨl < mandyвҲҲB. We havep/2вүӨn/m(вүӨp) oncemвүҘ2. Therefore in this case aan/m-admissible sequenceA m isap/2-admissible. It follows then from Lemma 7 that the numberk m ofan/m-admissiblesequencesA m satisfies logk m m вүӨF(О» k (F m ) + 2вҲ’ap/2), Moreover we have B f (x,n,Оұ)вҠӮB F m and for alltвҲҲОұ\[0,1\] k вҖ–Оӣ k d t (f n в—ҰПғ)вҖ– вҖ–Оӣ k d t ПғвҖ– = вҖ–Оӣ k d Оұ вҲ’1 t (f m в—Ұs)вҖ– вҖ–Оӣ k d Оұ вҲ’1 t sвҖ– . вҖ  Of course we only reparametrize in this a way the subsetПғ(Оұ\[0,1\] k ).But one can reparametrize similarlyПғ(C Оұ ) for any subcubeC Оұ of \[0,1\] k of sizeОұand we only needdОұ вҲ’1 e d such subcubes to cover \[0,1\] k . ENTROPY OF PHYSICAL MEASURES FORC вҲһ SMOOTH SYSTEMS15 Therefore we get вӢғ {ОұC s (A m ),A m an/m-admissible}вҠғ { tвҲҲОұ\[0,1\] k , вҖ–Оӣ k d t (f n в—ҰПғ)вҖ– вҖ–Оӣ k d t ПғвҖ– вүҘe na andПғ(t)вҲҲB(x,n,Оұ) } . ForОі >0 we takersuch that max(1,вҖ–dfвҖ– k/r )Г— ( max ( 1,вҖ–Оӣ k dfвҖ– ) e a ) k rвҲ’1 < e Оі/6 . We consider then an integerpso large that p > 6 (2k+ logC(r,d)) Оі and sup x>pОі/3 log 2 F(x) xвҲ’2 < Оі 6kmax(logвҖ–dfвҖ–,|a|) . This last constraint allows to control the numberk m ofan/m-admissible sequencesA m (observeО» k (F m )вүӨpklog + вҖ–dfвҖ–): logk m m вүӨF ( О» k (F m ) + 2вҲ’ap/2 ) , вүӨmax ( ( О» k (F m )вҲ’ap/2 ) sup x>pОі/3 log 2 F(x) xвҲ’2 ,sup xвүӨpОі/3 log 2 F(x) ) , вүӨmax ( pОі ( klog + вҖ–dfвҖ–+|a|/2 ) 6kmax(log + вҖ–dfвҖ–,|a|) ,pОі/3 ) , logk m m вүӨpОі/3. Moreover, for anyan/m-admissible sequenceA m = (a 0 ,В·В·В·,a mвҲ’1 ) we have max(1,вҖ–Оӣ k d 0 f l вҖ–) e a l вүҘ1/e 2 for any 0вүӨl < mand therefore C(r,d) m mвҲ’1 вҲҸ l=0 max пЈ« пЈӯ 1,вҖ–d 0 f l вҖ– k/r , ( max(1,вҖ–Оӣ k d 0 f l вҖ–) e a l ) k rвҲ’1 пЈ¶ пЈё вүӨ(e 2k C(r,d)) m mвҲ’1 вҲҸ l=0 max ( 1,вҖ–d 0 f l вҖ– k/r ) Г— mвҲ’1 вҲҸ l=0 ( max(1,вҖ–Оӣ k d 0 f l вҖ–) e a l ) k rвҲ’1 , вүӨ(e 2k C(r,d)) m пЈ« пЈӯ max(1,вҖ–dfвҖ– k/r )Г— ( max(1,вҖ–Оӣ k dfвҖ–) e a ) k rвҲ’1 пЈ¶ пЈё n , вүӨe 2k C(r,d)e Оіn/3 , where the last inequality follows frommвүӨ1 + n p вүӨ1 + Оіn 6(2k+logC(r,d)) ). 16DAVID BURGUET The reparametrizations (ПҶ m i ) iвҲҲI(A m ) built with respect toF p over all an/m-admissible sequencesA m then satisfies the conclusion of the Reparametriza- tion Lemma after a rescaling of sizeОұ: вҖў вӢғ { ОұПҶ m i (\[0,1\] k ), iвҲҲI(A m ) andA m an/m-admissible } вҠғ вӢғ {ОұC s (A m ),A m an/m-admissible} вҠғ { tвҲҲОұ\[0,1\] k , вҖ–Оӣ k d t (f n в—ҰПғ)вҖ– вҖ–Оӣ k d t ПғвҖ– вүҘe na andПғ(t)вҲҲB(x,n,Оұ) } . By taking a subfamily we may assume the image of each reparametriza- tion has a non empty intersection with this last set. вҖў вҲҖA m , iвҲҲI(A m ), вҖ–d(f n в—ҰПғв—ҰОұПҶ m i )вҖ–=ОұвҖ–d(f m в—Ұsв—ҰПҶ m i )вҖ–, вүӨОұ <1. вҖў вҲҖA m , iвҲҲI(A m ),we get from Lemma 5 (with the notationвҖ–Оӣ k d ПҶ gвҖ–:= max uвҲҲ\[0,1\] k вҖ–Оӣ k d ПҶ(u) gвҖ–for mapsПҶ: \[0,1\] k andg: \[0,1\] k вҶ’R d or M): вҖ–d ( t7вҶ’Оӣ k d ОұПҶ m i (t) (f n в—ҰПғ) ) вҖ–=вҖ–d ( t7вҶ’Оӣ k d ПҶ m i (t) (f m в—Ұs) ) вҖ–, вүӨ 1 2 вҖ–Оӣ k d ПҶ m i (f m в—Ұs)вҖ–, вүӨ 1 2 вҖ–Оӣ k d ОұПҶ m i (f n в—ҰПғ)вҖ–. Then it follows from the mean value inequality : вҲҖt,t вҖІ вҲҲ\[0,1\] k ,вҖ–Оӣ k d ОұПҶ m i (t) (f n в—ҰПғ)вҲ’Оӣ k d ОұПҶ m i (t вҖІ ) (f n в—ҰПғ)вҖ–вүӨ 1 2 вҖ–Оӣ k d ОұПҶ m i (f n в—ҰПғ)вҖ– and by the triangular inequality вҖ–Оӣ k d ОұПҶ m i (t) (f m в—ҰПғ)вҖ–вүҘвҖ–Оӣ k d ОұПҶ m i (t вҖІ ) (f m в—ҰПғ)вҖ–вҲ’ 1 2 вҖ–Оӣ k d ОұПҶ m i (f m в—ҰПғ)вҖ–. Finally we get by taking the maximum overt вҖІ вҲҲ\[0,1\] k : вҖ–Оӣ k d ОұПҶ m i (t) (f m в—ҰПғ)вҖ–вүҘ 1 2 вҖ–Оӣ k d ОұПҶ m i (f m в—ҰПғ)вҖ–. вҖў \]{ПҶ m i , iвҲҲI(A m ) andA m an/mвҲ’admissible} вүӨ вҲ‘ A m an/mвҲ’admissible \]I(A m ), вүӨe 2k C(r,d)re Оіn/3 k m , вүӨe 2k C(r,d)re Оіn/3 e Оіmp/3 , вүӨe Оіn fornlarge enough (withpstaying fixed). ENTROPY OF PHYSICAL MEASURES FORC вҲһ SMOOTH SYSTEMS17  Remark 6.In the proof of the Main Theorem below, we will only need to apply the Reparametrization Lemma fora >0. 4.Proof of the Main Theorem For 1вүӨkвүӨdanda < ПҮ k we letPL k a =PL(Leb {ПҮ k >a} ) be the set of pointsxinMsuch that any measure inpw(x) is physical-like with respect to the Lebesgue measure induced on{ПҮ k > a}. Proposition 7.For any1вүӨkвүӨdanda <ПҮ k we have вҲҖxвҲҲPL k a вҲғОј x вҲҲpw(x), h(Ој x )вүҘa. We first prove the Main Theorem assuming the above Proposition 7. Let Abe a countable and dense subset ofR + . The countable intersectionE over 1вүӨkвүӨdanda k вҲҲAof the setsPL k a k вҲӘ{ПҮ k вүӨa k }has full Lebesgue measure. FixxвҲҲEand let us show that there existsОј x вҲҲpw(x) with h(Ој x )вүҘОЈПҮ + (x). We may assume ОЈПҮ + (x)>0. TakekwithПҮ k (x) = ОЈПҮ + (x). For anya k вҲҲAwitha k < ПҮ k (x) we haveh(Ој x )вүҘa k for some Ој x вҲҲpw(x), according to Proposition 7. SinceAis dense inR + and the metric entropy is upper semicontinuous we conclude that sup Ој x вҲҲpw(x) h(Ој x ) = max Ој x вҲҲpw(x) h(Ој x )вүҘОЈПҮ + (x). Proof of Proposition 7.FixxinPL k a . For all >0 the setE={y, ПҮ k (y)> aandd H (pw(y),pw(x))< /2}has positive Lebesgue measure. LetFbe the subset ofEand letUbe theF-foliation box given both by Lemma 4. FixОі, >0. As the foliation is smooth, there is by FubiniвҖҷs theorem a leafL ofFintersectingFin a set of positive Lebesgue measure (for the Lebesgue measure Leb L induced on the smooth leafL). LetVbe a finite cover of pw(x) by ballsVof radius  2 centered atx V вҲҲpw(x).We put for all integers nand for allVвҲҲV B V n (=B V n (x)) :={yвҲҲLвҲ©FвҠӮU,вҖ–Оӣ k df n (T y F)вҖ–вүҘe na andd(Ој y n ,V)< /2}. By Borel-Cantelli Lemma we haveLeb L (B V вҖІ n )вүҘe вҲ’nОі for someV вҖІ вҲҲ V and fornin an infinite subsetI ,Оі of positive integers. Indeed ifnot we should have Leb L (lim sup n B V n ) = 0 for allVвҲҲ V, but as by Lemma 4 we haveLвҲ©FвҠӮ {y, ПҮ k (y,T y F)> aandd H (pw(y),pw(x))< /2} вҠӮ вӢғ VвҲҲV lim sup n B V n , it would contradict Leb L (F)>0. FornвҲҲI ,Оі we letОј n be the probability measure induced onB V вҖІ n by the Lebesgue measure Leb L onLandОҪ n := 1 n вҲ‘ nвҲ’1 l=0 f l Ој n = вҲ« Ој y n dОј n (y). By convexity of the metricd we haved(ОҪ n ,pw(x))вүӨd(ОҪ n ,x V вҖІ )< . 18DAVID BURGUET Lemma 8.With the above notations, any weak limitОҪ=ОҪ a,k ,Оі of(ОҪ n ) nвҲҲI ,Оі , whennвҲҲI ,Оі goes to infinity, is-close topw(x)and satisfies h(ОҪ)вүҘaвҲ’2Оі. We postpone the proof of Lemma 8. To conclude the proof of Proposition 7 (admitting Lemma 8) we consider a weak-limitОјofОҪ a,k ,Оі whenandОіboth go to zero. ClearlyОјвҲҲpw(x) and by upper semicontinuity of the metric entropy we geth(Ој)вүҘa. Proof of Lemma 8.LetОұbe the scale given by the Reparametrization Lemma with respect toОі,kanda. We consider a partitionPofMwith diame- ter less thanОұ. By standard arguments we may assume the boundary of Phas zeroОҪ-measure ; in particular the static entropyОј7вҶ’H Ој (P m ) is a continuous function for anymatОҪ. By Lemma 5 вҲҖm, 1 m H ОҪ n (P m )вүҘ 1 n (H Ој n (P n )вҲ’3mlog\]P). By taking the limit whennвҲҲI ,Оі goes to infinity we get 1 m H ОҪ (P m )вүҘlim inf nвҲҲI ,Оі 1 n H Ој n (P n ). LetP n y being the element of the partitionP n containingyвҲҲM. Then we have H Ој n (P n ) = вҲ« вҲ’logОј n (P n y )dОј n (y). We apply the Reparametrization Lemma at a given pointyto aC вҲһ map Пғ: \[0,1\] k вҶ’Mparametrizing the leafL. By taking the foliation boxUsmall enough we can assumeвҖ–dПғвҖ–вүӨ1 and Оӣ k d t Пғ6= 0 for alltвҲҲ\[0,1\] k . Fornlarge enough we letОёbe the resulting reparametrizations. The setP n y вҲ©B V вҖІ n (x)вҠӮ B(y,n,Оұ)вҲ©B V вҖІ n (x) is covered by the images of theОёвҖҷs. The Lebesgue measure of eachf n в—ҰПғв—ҰОёis bounded from above by a universal constantCaccording to the second item of the Reparametrization Lemma. From the first item and the third item we getвҖ–Оӣ k d Оё(t) (f n в—ҰПғ)вҖ–вүҘвҖ–Оӣ k d Оё(t) ПғвҖ–e na /2 for anytвҲҲ\[0,1\] k . Together with the upperbound on the number of reparametrizations given ENTROPY OF PHYSICAL MEASURES FORC вҲһ SMOOTH SYSTEMS19 in the last item we have fornlarge enough (independently ofyвҲҲM) : Leb L (P n y вҲ©B V вҖІ n (x))вүӨ вҲ‘ Оё Leb((Пғв—ҰОё)(\[0,1 k \])), вүӨ вҲ‘ Оё вҲ« \[0,1\] k вҖ–Оӣ k d Оё(t) ПғвҖ–вҖ–Оӣ k d t ОёвҖ–dt, вүӨ вҲ‘ Оё 2e вҲ’na вҲ« \[0,1\] k вҖ–Оӣ k d Оё(t) (f n в—ҰПғ)вҖ–вҖ–Оӣ k d t ОёвҖ–dt, вүӨ вҲ‘ Оё 2e вҲ’na Leb((f n в—ҰПғв—ҰОё)(\[0,1 k \])), вүӨ2Ce вҲ’na \]{Оё}, Leb L (P n y вҲ©B V вҖІ n (x))вүӨ2Ce вҲ’na Г—e Оіn . But fornвҲҲI ,Оі we have also Leb L (B V вҖІ n (x))вүҘe вҲ’nОі so that we finally get for large enoughnвҲҲI ,Оі and for allyвҲҲM Ој n (P n y )вүӨ2Ce вҲ’na Г—e 2Оіn , H Ој n (P n )вүҘ(aвҲ’2Оі)nвҲ’log(2C) and for allm 1 m H ОҪ (P m )вүҘlim inf nвҲҲI ,Оі 1 n H Ој n (P n )вүҘaвҲ’2Оі. By taking the limit inmwe conclude h(ОҪ)вүҘaвҲ’2Оі.  AppendixA.Counter-example forC r interval maps for any finiter For any positive integerrwe give an example of aC r (but notC r+1 ) interval maph: \[0,3/2\] such that forxin a positive Lebesgue measure set the following properties hold: (1) the empirical measures (Ој x n ) n are converging to the Dirac measure at a fixed point (therefore with zero entropy), (2) the Lyapunov exponent atxsatisfiesПҮ(x) = logвҖ–h вҖІ вҖ– вҲһ r >0. Consequently the Main Theorem does not hold true in finite smoothness. Step 1: LetО» >1. We first consider aC r (evenC вҲһ ) interval mapf: \[0,3/2\] with the following properties вҖўf(0) =f(1) = 0, 20DAVID BURGUET вҖўfhas a tangency of orderrat 1, i.e.f (k) (1) = 0 fork= 1,...,r, вҖўfis affine with a slope equal toО»=вҖ–f вҖІ вҖ– вҲһ on the interval \[0,1/О»\]. Step 2:After a smallC вҲһ perturbation offaround 1 we may build a new mapgsuch that for somen 0 andnвүҘn 0 ,g k (1вҲ’1/n) lies in \[0,1/О»\] for k= 1,...,r n вҲ’1 andg r n (1вҲ’1/n) = 1вҲ’1/n+ 1. Indeed these conditions requireg(1вҲ’1/n) = (1вҲ’1/n+ 1)О» вҲ’r n +1 =o(1/n r ), so that one can chooseg arbitrarilyC вҲһ closed tofby takingn 0 large enough. For the interval map g, the empirical measures at 1вҲ’1/nare converging to the Dirac measure at the fixed point 0. We may also assumegis constant onJ n := \[1вҲ’1/n,1вҲ’ 1/nвҲ’1/2n 2 \] fornвүҘn 0 . 0 1 1 3/2 1/ J n n+1 J . . . . . . Figure 1:The graph ofgin red.The arrows and points in blue represent the orbit of1вҲ’1/nвҲҲJ n . Step 3:We lastly modifygonJ n ,nвүҘn 0 such that the resulting maph satisfies the desired properties. Let us first introduce an auxiliary family of functions (f p ) pвҲҲN . For anypwe definef p as the tent mapx7вҶ’max(x,1вҲ’x) on \[1/p,1/2вҲ’1/p\]вҲӘ\[1/2 + 1/p,1вҲ’1/p\]. We extend it into aC r smooth interval map in such a wayf p vanishes and admits a tangency of orderrat the points 0,1/2 and 1. Finally we extendf p periodically on the whole real axis. The intervals \[1/p,1/2вҲ’1/p\] +kand \[1/2 + 1/p,1вҲ’1/p\] +kforkвҲҲZ are called the affine branches off p . Observe that theC r norm вҖЎ off p may be chosen of orderp r . Then we lethbex7вҶ’Оұ n f n 2 ( (xвҲ’1 + 1/n)2n 2 N n ) + g(1вҲ’1/n) onJ n whereОұ n вҲҲR + andN n вҲҲNare chosen such that вҖўfor each affine branchI n inJ n , h k (I n )вҠӮ\[0,1/О»\] fork= 1,...,r n вҲ’1 вҖЎ TheC r norm of aC r smooth interval mapfis the maximum overk= 0,...,rof the supremum normsвҖ–f (k) вҖ– вҲһ . ENTROPY OF PHYSICAL MEASURES FORC вҲһ SMOOTH SYSTEMS21 and h r n (I n ) =J n+1 , вҖўtheC r norm ofhonJ n goes to zero withn. The first and second conditions are respectively fulfilled whenever О» r n вҲ’1 Г—Оұ n (1/2вҲ’2/n 2 ) = 1/2(n+ 1) 2 and max k=1,...,r вҖ–f (k) n 2 вҖ– вҲһ Г—Оұ n Г—(2n 2 N n ) r вҲјn 2r Г—Оұ n Г—(2n 2 N n ) r = 1/n. n n+1 J J I n Figure 2:The graph ofhonJ n in red.The arrows and intervals in blue represent the imageJ n+1 of an affine branchI n underh r n . Conclusion: LetE n = вӢғ I n I n be the union of affine branches inJ n and let E=E n 0 вҲ©h вҲ’r n 0 E n 0 +1 вҲ©h вҲ’r n 0 вҲ’r n 0 +1 E n 0 +2 вҲ©...be the subset of points inJ n 0 visiting successively the setsE n ,nвүҘn 0 . ClearlyEis contained in the basin of the Dirac measure at 0. To conclude it remains to see thatEhas positive Lebesgue measure and thatПҮ(x)вүҘ logО» r for anyxinE. The setEis an affine dynamically defined Cantor set where we remove a proportion of 4/n 2 at then th step. Therefore Leb(E) = Leb(E n 0 ) вҲҸ n>n 0 (1вҲ’4/n 2 )>0. Finally as log|h вҖІ |is equal onI n to log(Оұ n 4n 2 N n )вҲј rвҲ’1 r logОұ n вҲјвҲ’r nвҲ’1 (rвҲ’1) logО», the Lyapunov exponent at anyxвҲҲEis given by ПҮ(x) = lim sup p 1 p log|(h p ) вҖІ (x)|, = logО»lim q вҲ‘ qвүҘnвүҘn 0 ( r n вҲ’r nвҲ’1 (rвҲ’1) ) вҲ‘ nвүҘn 0 r n , = logО» r . AppendixB.Essential range ofx7вҶ’pw(x) We recall here the definition of the essential range of a Borel map with re- spect to a Borel measure. Finally we relate the set of physical-like measures of a topological system (M,f) with the essential range ofM3x7вҶ’pw(x). We consider two metric spacesXandYwithYseparable. Letmbe a Borel measure onXandПҶ:XвҶ’Ybe a Borel map. 22DAVID BURGUET Definition 1.With the above notations the essential rangeIm m (ПҶ) of ПҶwith respect tomis the complement of{yвҲҲY,вҲғUopen withyвҲҲ Uandm(ПҶ вҲ’1 U) = 0}. The set Im m (ПҶ) is a closed subset ofYand form-almost everyxthe pointПҶ(x) belongs to Im m (ПҶ). Moreover it is the smallest set satisfying these properties. Lemma 9.Let(M,f)be a topological system. The mappw:x7вҶ’pw(x) fromMtoKM(M)is Borel. Proof.As the setKM(M) is separable, it is enough to showpw вҲ’1 (B) is a Borel subset ofMfor any closed ballBofKM(M). LetBbe the closed ball of radiuscentered atKвҲҲKM(M), i.e. the set of compact subsetsK вҖІ ofM withK вҖІ вҠӮK  andKвҠӮK вҖІ  whereK  andK вҖІ  denote respectively the closed -neighborhoods ofKandK вҖІ . Firstly observe that{xвҲҲM, pw(x)вҠӮK  }is closed. Then for a fixed sequence (k n ) nвҲҲN dense inKthe following properties are equivalent : KвҠӮ(pw(x))  , вҮ”d(k n ,pw(x))вүӨfor alln, вҮ”lim inf p d(k n ,Ој p x )<  вҖІ for allnandQ3 вҖІ > . The fonctionsx7вҶ’d(k n ,Ој p x ) being continous we conclude thatpw вҲ’1 (B) is a Borel set. Lemma 10.The setPL(m)of physical-like measure is the union of all KвҲҲ Im m (pw). Proof.Firstly, the set Im m (pw) being a compact subset ofKM(M), the set вӢғ KвҲҲIm m (pw) Kis a compact subset ofM. Therefore, from the definitions we getPL(m)вҠӮ вӢғ KвҲҲ Im m (pw) K. We argue by contradiction to prove the converse inclusion. Assume there isKвҲҲIm m (pw) such thatKis not contained inPL(m). Then this also holds for anyK вҖІ close enough toK. Therefore there exists an open neighborhoodUofKsuch thatpw вҲ’1 (U) has positivem-measure and for allxin this setpw(x) is not contained in PL(m). It is impossible by definition ofPL(m). References 1. L. Bareira and Y. Pesin,Nonuniform Hyperbolicity: Dynamics of Systems with Nonzero Lyapunov Exponents,Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications vol 115 (2007) 2. M.Boyle, T.Downarowicz,The entropy theory of symbolic extension, Invent. Math. 156 (2004), no.1, 119-161 . 3. Bonatti, C., Diaz, L., Viana, M.,Dynamics beyond uniform hyperbolicity. A global geometric and probabilistic perspective, Encyclopaedia of Mathematical Sciences, 102. Mathematical Physics, III. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2005. xviii+384 pp. ENTROPY OF PHYSICAL MEASURES FORC вҲһ SMOOTH SYSTEMS23 4. R. Bowen,Equilibrium states and the ergodic theory of Anosov diffeomorphisms, Springer Lecture Notes in Math. 470 (1975). 5. D. Burguet,Symbolic extensions in intermediate smoothness on surfaces, Ann. Sci. c. Norm. Supr. (4) 45 (2012), no. 2, 337362. 6. D. Burguet,Periodic expansiveness of surface diffeomorphisms and applications, J.E.M.S. (to appear). 7. E. Catsigeras and H. Enrich,SRB-like measures for C0 dynamics, Bull. Pol. Acad. Sci. Math. 59 (2011), no. 2, 151164. 8. E. Catsigeras, M.Cerminara and H. Enrich,The Pesin entropy formula for diffeomorphisms with dominated splitting, Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems, 35(3), 737-761 (2015). 9. M. Gromov,Entropy, homology and semi-algebraic geometry, Seminaire Bourbaki 663 (1986). 10. O. Kozlovski,An integral formula for topological entropy ofC infty maps, Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems, 18(2), 405-424 (1998). 11. F. Ledrappier and L.-S. Young,The metric entropy of diffeomorphisms. I. Characterization of measures satisfying Pesins entropy formula., Ann. of Math. (2) 122 (1985), no. 3, 509-539. 12. L.-S. Young,What are SRB measures, and which dynamical systems have them?, J. Statist. Phys. 108 (2002), no. 5-6, 733754. 13. Misiurewicz, M..,A short proof of the variational principle forZ d actions, Asterisque 40 (1976), 147158. 14. S.Newhouse,Continuity properties of entropy, Annals of Math., 129 (1989), 215-235. 15. V. I. Oseledets,A multiplicative ergodic theorem: Lyapunov characteristic numbers for dy- namical systems, Trans. Moscow Math. Soc. 19 (1968), 197231. 16. Ott, William; Yorke, James A.,When Lyapunov exponents fail to exist, Phys. Rev. E (3) 78 (2008), no. 5 17. Y. Pesin,Lyapunov characteristic exponent and smooth ergodic theory, Russian Math. Surveys 32(1977), no. 4, 55-114. 18. M. Qian and S. Zhu,SRB measures and Pesins entropy formula for endomorphisms, Trans. of the Amer. Math. Soc., 354(4):14531471, 2002. 19. D. Ruelle,A measure associated with Axiom A attractors, Amer. J. Math. 98: 619654 (1976). 20. David Ruelle,An inequality for the entropy of differentiable maps, Bol. Soc. Brasil. Mat. 9 (1978), no. 1, 8387. 21. Ya. G. Sinai,Gibbs measure in ergodic theory, Russian Math. Surveys 27:2169 22. M. Tsujii,Regular point for ergodic Sinai measuresI, Transactions of the American Mathe- matical Society Volume 328, Number 2, December 1991. 23. L. S. Young,Entropy of continuous flows on compact 2-manifolds, Topology 16 (4) (1977), 469471. 24. Y. Yomdin,C k resolution of semialgebraic mappings, Israel J. Math., 57, 3 (1987), 301-317. Sorbonne Universite, LPSM, 75005 Paris, France E-mail address:david.burguet@upmc.fr
