A N N A L E S D E L ’ I N S T I T U T F O U R I E R ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER Felipe RIQUELME Counterexamples to Ruelle’s inequality in the noncompact case Tome 67, n o 1 (2017), p. 23-41. <http://aif.cedram.org/item?id=AIF\_2017\_\_67\_1\_23\_0> © Association des Annales de l’institut Fourier, 2017, Certains droits réservés. Cet article est mis à disposition selon les termes de la licence CREATIVECOMMONS ATTRIBUTION–PAS DE MODIFICATION3.0 FRANCE. http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/fr/ L’accès aux articles de la revue « Annales de l’institut Fourier » (http://aif.cedram.org/), implique l’accord avec les conditions générales d’utilisation (http://aif.cedram.org/legal/). cedram Article mis en ligne dans le cadre du Centre de diffusion des revues académiques de mathématiques http://www.cedram.org/ Ann. Inst. Fourier, Grenoble 67, 1 (2017) 23-41 COUNTEREXAMPLES TO RUELLE’S INEQUALITY IN THE NONCOMPACT CASE by Felipe RIQUELME (\*) Abstract. —In this paper we show that there exist smooth dynamical sys- tems defined on noncompact Riemannian manifolds that do not satisfy Ruelle’s inequality between entropy and Lyapunov exponents. More precisely, we construct dynamical systems that look like suspension flows over countable interval exchange transformations, so that the local behavior is that of a translation, whereas the en- tropy can take any nonzero value. Résumé. —Dans cet article nous montrons qu’il existe des systèmes dyna- miques lisses définis sur des variétés riemanniennes non compactes qui ne satisfont pas l’inégalité de Ruelle entre l’entropie et les exposants de Lyapounov. Plus pré- cisément, nous construisons des systèmes dynamiques qui ressemblent aux flots de suspension au-dessus de transformations d’échanges d’intervalles dénombrables, de sorte que le comportement local est celui d’une translation, alors que l’entropie peut prendre n’importe quelle valeur non nulle. 1. Introduction Letf:M→Mbe aC 1 -diffeomorphism of a Riemannian manifold and letμbe anf-invariant probability measure onM. The measure-theoretic entropy offwith respect toμ, denoted byh μ (f), is an ergodic invariant measuring the exponential growth rate of the complexity of the dynamics from the point of view ofμ. The set of (Lyapunov–Perron) regular points in M, denoted byΛ, is the set of points where the asymptotic eigenvalues of the linearized dynamics ofdfare (somehow) well defined. These eigenvalues are called Lyapunov exponents off(see definition in Section 2.2). WhenM Keywords:ergodic theory, Riemannian geometry, smooth dynamical systems, Lyapunov exponents, Ruelle’s inequality. Math. classification:37A05, 37A35, 37C05, 37C10, 37C40. (\*) The author wish to thank Pierre Arnoux, Vincent Delecroix, Sébastien Gouëzel, Godofredo Iommi, François Ledrappier, Barbara Schapira and Juan Souto for many useful discussions and commentaries that improved the paper. 24Felipe RIQUELME is compact the setΛhas full measure (see \[8\]). Moreover, Ruelle’s inequality (see \[9\]) says that the measure-theoretic entropy offwith respect toμis controlled by the sum of the positive Lyapunov exponents, that is h μ (f)6 ∫ χ + (x)dμ(x), whereχ + (x)is the sum of the positive Lyapunov exponents atx∈Λ, counted with multiplicity. WhenMis a noncompact Riemannian manifold, no general such state- ment is known. In \[4\] the authors proved that Ruelle’s inequality holds for diffeomorphisms with singularities on compact manifolds under some technical assumptions. Note that these diffeomorphisms can be understood like diffeomorphisms defined on noncompact manifolds. In any case, the compacity of the underlying manifold seems to be a crucial hypothesis. The aim of this paper is to show that for any strictly positive real number, there is a smooth dynamical system defined on a noncompact manifold for which Ruelle’s inequality is no longer satisfied. More precisely, we have Theorem 1.1. —For allh∈(0,∞\]there exists a noncompact Rie- mannian manifoldM, aC ∞ -diffeomorphismf:M→Mand anf-invariant probability measureμoverM, whose measure-theoretic entropy satisfies h μ (f) =hand such thatμ-almost everywhere the Lyapunov exponents are equal to zero. In other words, we have 0 = ∫ χ + dμ < h μ (f)6∞. The key idea behind this theorem is the following. We will construct dynamical systems that look like suspension flows over countable interval exchange transformations, so that the local behavior is that of a translation, whereas the entropy comes from infinity. Remark 1.2. —The Riemannian metricgof our construction is not complete. We know that we can always find a complete Riemannian met- ric conformal tog(see \[7, Theorem 1\]), but we cannot ensure that the Lyapunov exponents associated to this one remain equal to zero. In Section 2 we give some background on entropy, Lyapunov exponents and countable interval exchange transformations. Section 3 is devoted to the construction of the manifoldM, the diffeomorphismfand the measure μ, that are used to prove Theorem 1.1 in Section 4. ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER COUNTEREXAMPLES TO RUELLE’S INEQUALITY25 2. Preliminaries 2.1. Measure-theoretic entropy Let(X,μ)be a probability space andT:X→Xa measurable trans- formation. LetPbe a finite measurable partition ofX. The entropy ofP with respect toμ, denoted byH μ (P), is defined as H μ (P) =− ∑ P∈P μ(P) logμ(P). For alln>0define the partitionP n as the measurable partition consisting of all possible intersections of elements ofT −i P, for alli= 0,...,n−1. The entropy ofTwith respect to the partitionPis then defined as the limit h μ (T,P) = lim n→∞ 1 n H μ (P n ). Themeasure-theoretic entropy ofT, with respect toμ, is the supremum of the entropiesh μ (T,P)over all measurable finite partitionsPofX, i.e. h μ (T) = sup Pfinite h μ (T,P). We recall that the measure-theoretic entropy is invariant under (measure) conjugation (see for instance \[10, Theorem 4.11\]). 2.2. Lyapunov exponents In the study of a smooth dynamical system it is natural to linearize the dynamics, and the notion of Lyapunov exponents is particularly relevant. Let(M,g)be a Riemannian manifold andf:M→MaC 1 -map. For x∈M, let‖ · ‖ x denote the Riemannian norm induced bygonT x M. The pointxis said to be (Lyapunov–Perron)regularif there exist numbers {λ i (x)} s(x) i=1 , calledLyapunov exponents, and a decomposition of the tangent space atxintoT x M= ⊕ s(x) i=1 E i (x)such that (1) for every tangent vectorv∈E i (x)\\{0}, we have lim n→±∞ 1 n log‖d x f n v‖ f n x =λ i (x),and (2) the exponential growth rate of the determinant ofd x f n is given by the sum of the Lyapunov exponents, that is lim n→±∞ 1 n log|det(d x f n )|= s(x) ∑ i=1 λ i (x) dim(E i (x)). TOME 67 (2017), FASCICULE 1 26Felipe RIQUELME LetΛbe the set of regular points. Ifx∈Λandλ i (x)is a positive Lyapunov exponent, locally the action ofd x fin the direction ofE i (x)is expanding. On the other hand, ifλ i (x)is a negative Lyapunov exponent, locally the action ofd x fin the direction ofE i (x)is contracting. By a theorem of Oseledec (\[8\],\[5\]), ifμis anf-invariant probability mea- sure onMsuch thatlog + ‖df‖andlog + ‖df −1 ‖areμ-integrable, the setΛ is a set ofμ-full measure. WhenMis compact andfisC 1 these assump- tions are always satisfied. In particular, by Oseledec’s Theorem, the setΛ is a set of full measure for allf-invariant probability measures onM. Theorem 2.1(Ruelle). —LetMbe a compact Riemannian manifold andf:M→MaC 1 -diffeomorphism. Then, for everyf-invariant proba- bility measureμonM, we have h μ (f)6 ∫ χ + (x)dμ(x), whereχ + (x) = ∑ λ i (x)>0 λ i (x) dim(E i (x)). 2.3. Interval exchange transformations As said above, the main idea behind the construction of the family of counterexamples to Ruelle’s inequality is to imitate the dynamics of a countable interval exchange transformation. A countable interval exchange transformation is an invertible measurable mapT: \[0,1)→\[0,1)satisfying the following conditions (1) There is a strictly increasing sequence{x i }⊂\[0,1)and a sequence {a i } ⊂Rsuch thatx 0 = 0,lim i→∞ x i = 1andT(x) =x+a i for allx∈\[x i ,x i+1 ); (2) The unique accumulation point of the set{x i +a i }∪{x i+1 +a i } is 1; Denote bymthe Lebesgue measure on\[0,1)and letTbe a countable interval exchange transformation. SinceTis piecewisely defined by trans- lations, it preservesm. We denote byI T , or simplyI, the partition of \[0,1)defined by the intervals{\[x i ,x i+1 )} i>0 . This partition satisfies the following entropy property. Proposition 2.2(Blume, \[3\]). —LetTbe an interval exchange trans- formation. Ifh m (T)>0thenH m (I) =∞. Let(X,m,T)be an ergodic probability dynamical system. We say that Tisaperiodicif it is invertible and the set of periodic points is a set ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER COUNTEREXAMPLES TO RUELLE’S INEQUALITY27 ofm-measure equal to zero. The following theorem says that the study of aperiodic dynamical can be reduced to the study of countable interval exchange transformations. Theorem 2.3(Arnoux–Orstein–Weiss, \[2\]). —Every aperiodic dynam- ical system is measurably conjugated to a countable interval exchange transformation over\[0,1)endowed with the Lebesgue measure. This theorem give us plenty of useful dynamical systems to manipulate in order to construct our counterexamples. More precisely, since the entropy is invariant by measure-conjugation it follows that for allh∈(0,∞\]there exists a countable interval exchange transformation with measure-theoretic entropyh m (T)equal toh. 3. Suspension flows as smooth dynamical systems The aim of this section is to construct a smooth dynamical system which looks roughly like a suspension flow over a fixed countable interval exchange transformation. LetT: \[0,1)→\[0,1)be a countable interval exchange transformation and letI= (0,1)be the unit interval. We will consider the family{I i } i∈N of subintervals ofIdefined asI 0 = (x 0 ,x 1 )andI i = \[x i ,x i+1 )for alli>1. For the sake of simplicity, we definel i =m(I i )and S={x i } i∈N . Note that sinceTis piecewise defined by translations, the mapT| I\\S is smooth. 3.1. Construction of the Riemannian manifold We are going to construct a functionr:I→R + ∪{+∞}such thatr| I\\S is smooth andlim x→x i r(x) = +∞for alli>0. Moreover, this function will be constant equal to 1 on a set of large Lebesgue measure. For alli>0, consider a real number0< b i < l i /2. Theb i ’s will be properly chosen in section 4. We define five subintervals ofI i as follows: I i,1 =\]x i ,x i +b i /2\[, I i,2 = \[x i +b i /2,x i +b i \[, I i,3 = \[x i +b i ,x i+1 −b i \[, I i,4 = \[x i+1 −b i ,x i+1 −b i /2\[, I i,5 = \[x i+1 −b i /2,x i+1 \[. Letα:R→\[0,1\]be a smooth function such thatα| (−∞,0\] ≡1, the restrictionα| I is strictly decreasing andα| \[1,∞) ≡0. Letγ i,2 : \[x i +b i /2, x i +b i \]→\[0,1\]andγ i,4 : \[x i+1 −b i ,x i+1 −b i /2\]→\[0,1\]be defined by γ i,2 (x) = (x−(x i +b i /2))/(b i /2)andγ i,4 (x) = (x−(x i+1 −b i ))/(b i /2). TOME 67 (2017), FASCICULE 1 28Felipe RIQUELME Finally consider the functionα i :I i →Rdefined by α i (x) =                  1,ifx∈I i,1 (α◦γ i,2 )(x),ifx∈I i,2 0,ifx∈I i,3 1−(α◦γ i,4 )(x),ifx∈I i,4 1,ifx∈I i,5 . Note that, for alli>0, the functionα i is smooth by construction. In order to define the functionr, we proceed as follows: first consider for alli>0 the functionf i :I i →R + defined by f i (x) = { 1−log((x−x i )/b i ),ifx∈(x i ,x i +l i /2\] 1−log((x i+1 −x)/b i ),ifx∈\[x i +l i /2,x i+1 ). The functionf i is smooth on(x i ,x i +l i /2)and(x i +l i /2,x i+1 ). The map r i :I i →Rdefined byr i (x) =α i (x)f i (x) + (1−α i (x))is smooth onI i . It is constant equal to1overI i,3 sinceα i is equal to zero overI i,3 . It is equal tof i overI i,1 ∪I i,5 . Finally, define the maprasr i overI i and equal to +∞otherwise. | x i | x i +b i | x i+1 −b i | x i+1 | x i +l i /2 Figure 3.1. Graph of the functionr i ConsiderTandras above. We define a topological spaceM=M(T,r) as the quotientI×R/∼with the induced topology fromI×R, where the equivalence relation∼is defined by(x,r(x))∼(T(x),−r(x)). We denote byπ:I×R→Mthe canonical projection defined by this relation. Let \[x,y\] =π((x,y))be the projection of the point(x,y)∈I×RontoM. Our goal is to prove first the existence of a structure of smooth (noncompact) manifold onM, and second, that it admits a “nice” Riemannian metric. ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER COUNTEREXAMPLES TO RUELLE’S INEQUALITY29 LetM ∗ be the subset ofMdefined by M ∗ ={\[x,y\]∈M:x∈\]0,1\[,−r(T −1 x)< y < r(x)}) and letFbe the subset ofMdefined byF={\[x,r(x)\] :x∈I\\S}. • z • z • \[x,0\] • \[Tx,0\] Figure 3.2. The topological spaceM Proposition 3.1. —The topological spaceM=M(T,r)admits a structure of smooth manifold. Proof. —It suffices to construct an atlas by considering two families of local charts onM. Forz= \[x,y\]∈M ∗ , letε >0be such that the Euclidean ε-ball centered at(x,y)∈R 2 , denoted byB((x,y),ε), is contained in the setπ −1 M ∗ . The local chart aroundzis then defined by the inverse map ψ e z =π −1 fromπ(B((x,y),ε))toB((x,y),ε). Such a local chart will be called afirst-kind local chart. On the other hand, ifz= \[ ̃x,r( ̃x)\]∈F, the definition of a local chart aroundzis more delicate. Consider ̃x∈I j for somej>0. Choose two real numbers0< ε < 1 2 min{| ̃x−x j |,| ̃x−x j+1 |} and0< η < 1 2 . We define the setsV ε,η +,j (z)andV ε,η −,j (z)by V ε,η +,j (z) ={(x,y) :|x− ̃x|< ε, r(x)−η < y6r(x)} and V ε,η −,j (z) ={(x,y) :|x−T ̃x|< ε,−r(x)6y <−r(x) +η}. TOME 67 (2017), FASCICULE 1 30Felipe RIQUELME ̃x • | ̃x−ε | ̃x+ε − − η − − η z • V ε,η +,j (z) ψ ε,η z z • V ε,η −,j (z) T( ̃x) • | T( ̃x)−ε | T( ̃x) +ε Note that the setV ε,η (z) =π(V ε,η +,j (z)∪V ε,η −,j (z))is an open neighbour- hood ofz. Moreover, the applicationψ ε,η z :V ε,η (z)→R 2 , defined by ψ ε,η z (\[x,y\]) = { (x,y−r(x)),if(x,y)∈V ε,η +,j (z) (x,y+r(x)),if(Tx,y)∈V ε,η −,j (z), defines a local chart aroundzthat we will callsecond-kind local chart. It remains to show that all transition maps between local charts are smooth. It is straightforward for two local charts of the first-kind or two lo- cal charts of second-kind. In both cases we obtain the identity as transition map. Consider a local chartψ 1 of first-kind and a local chartψ 2 of second- kind. The transition mapψ 1 ◦ψ −1 2 will be of the form(x,y)7→(x,y+r(x)) or(x,y)7→(Tx,y−r(x))depending on the domainV ε,η +,j (z)orV ε,η −,j (z)that we take. If we consider now the transition mapψ 2 ◦ψ −1 1 , it will be of the form(x,y)7→(x,y−r(x))or(x,y)7→(T −1 x,y−r(T −1 x))depending also on the same domains. In both cases, the transition maps are smooth since randTare smooth on their respective domains. Observe thatM ∗ is the image of the setN={(x,y)∈R 2 :x∈\]0,1\[, −r(T −1 x)< y < r(x)}under the projection mapπ. Sinceπ| N is a home- omorphism, the Euclidean metric ̃g e onR 2 induces a natural Riemannian metricg e = (π| −1 N ) ∗ ̃g e onM ∗ . This Euclidean metricg e cannot be extended to the whole manifoldMbecause the local charts around the points ofF, whereris not locally constant, cause distortion of the Euclidian metric. Definition 3.2. —LetMbe a smooth manifold. Letg 1 andg 2 be two Riemannian metrics onM. We say thatg 1 andg 2 arepointwiseequivalent if for allp∈Mthere exists a constantC(p)>1such that for allv∈T p M, C(p) −1 6 g 1 p (v,v) g 2 p (v,v) 6C(p). ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER COUNTEREXAMPLES TO RUELLE’S INEQUALITY31 Proposition 3.3. —The smooth manifoldM=M(T,r)admits a Rie- mannian metricg, which is pointwise equivalent to the Euclidian metricg e in restriction toM ∗ . Proof. —Letz∈Fand choose someε >0and0< δ <1/2such that the second-kind local chart aroundzis well defined. Define a Riemannian metrich δ onV ε,δ (z)byh δ = (ψ ε,δ z ) ∗ ̃g e . This Riemannian metric is well defined since the transition map between two local charts of second-kind is the identity. LetR δ be the set defined by R δ ={\[x,y\]∈M:x∈I\\S ,−r(T −1 x)< y <−r(T −1 x) +δ orr(x)−δ < y6r(x)}. Note thatR δ is the set of all the points contained in someV δ,ε (w), with w∈F. Choose now a smooth functionρ δ :M→\[0,1\]such thatρ δ | M\\R δ ≡ 1,ρ δ | F ≡0and0< ρ δ <1otherwise. The metricg δ defined byg δ = ρ δ g e + (1−ρ δ )h δ is by construction a Riemannian metric. It coincides with the Euclidean metricg e onM\\R δ . Lemma 3.4. —The Riemannian metricsg e andg δ are pointwise equiv- alent onM ∗ . Proof of Lemma 3.4. —Letz= \[x,y\]∈M ∗ . We denote by‖·‖ δ z (resp. ‖·‖ e z ) (1) the norm induced byg δ (resp.g e ) onT z M. Let ̃z∈Fandε,δ >0 such thatψ ε,δ ̃z is well defined. We denote by‖d z ψ ε,δ ̃z ‖the operator norm of the mapd z ψ ε,δ ̃z : (T z M,g e z )→(R 2 , ̃g e ). Then, ifz∈V ε,δ +,j ( ̃z), in local coordinates we have d z ψ ε,δ ̃z = ( 10 −r ′ (x) 1 ) , d ψ ε,δ ̃z z (ψ ε,δ ̃z ) −1 = ( 10 r ′ (x) 1 ) . On the other hand, ifz∈V ε,δ −,j ( ̃z), in local coordinates we have d z ψ ε,δ ̃z = ( 10 r ′ (T −1 x) 1 ) , d ψ ε,δ ̃z z (ψ ε,δ ̃z ) −1 = ( 10 −r ′ (T −1 x) 1 ) . Note that inR n the Euclidian norm‖·‖ 2 is comparable with the maxi- mum norm‖·‖ ∞ by ‖·‖ ∞ 6‖·‖ 2 6n‖·‖ ∞ . SinceMis a2-dimensional manifold, we can check that16‖d z ψ ε,δ ̃z ‖6 2(1 +|r ′ (x)|)and16‖d ψ ε,δ ̃z z (ψ ε,δ ̃z ) −1 ‖62(1 +|r ′ (x)|). Thus, for allv∈ (1) Do not confuse the norm‖·‖ δ with a power of the norm‖·‖. TOME 67 (2017), FASCICULE 1 32Felipe RIQUELME T z M, we have (‖v‖ δ z ) 2 =g δ z (v,v) =ρ δ (z)g e z (v,v) + (1−ρ δ )h δ (v,v) =ρ δ (z)g e z (v,v) + (1−ρ δ )g e (d z ψ ε,δ ̃z (v),d z ψ ε,δ ̃z (v)) 6ρ δ (z)g e z (v,v) + (1−ρ δ )‖d z ψ ε,δ ̃z ‖ 2 g e z (v,v) 6‖dψ ε,δ ̃z ‖ 2 (‖v‖ e z ) 2 , and (‖v‖ e z ) 2 = (‖(d z ψ ε,δ ̃z ) −1 d z ψ ε,δ ̃z (v)‖ e z ) 2 6‖(d z ψ ε,δ ̃z ) −1 ‖ 2 (‖d z ψ ε,δ ̃z (v)‖ e z ) 2 =‖(d z ψ ε,δ ̃z ) −1 ‖ 2 (‖v‖ δ z ) 2 . Forz= \[x,y\]∈M ∗ defineC(z)asC(z) = (2 + 2|r ′ (x)|). It follows that for allv∈T z M, we have (3.1)C(z) −1 ‖v‖ e z 6‖v‖ δ z 6C(z)‖v‖ e z . This concludes the proof of Proposition 3.3. Observe that the constantCintroduced in the proof of Lemma 3.4 is not optimal. In fact, whenris locally constant, both metrics locally coincide. 3.2. The diffeomorphism From now on(M,g δ )is the Riemannian manifold constructed in Subsec- tion 3.1. Thesuspension flow(φ t )onMis defined as follows. For allt∈R we defineφ t :M→Mbyφ t (\[x,y\]) = \[x,y+t\]. The unit mapφ 1 =φof the suspension flow satisfies φ(\[x,y\]) = { \[x,y+ 1\]ify+ 1< r(x) \[Tx,y+ 1−2r(x)\]ify+ 1>r(x). Proposition 3.5. —The mapφ:M→Mis smooth. Proof. —Recall that the mapφis smooth if, for all local chartsψ α and ψ β , the mapφ α,β =ψ α ◦φ◦ψ −1 β is smooth whenever it is defined. Ifψ α and ψ β are first-kind local charts, the mapφ α,β is equal to(x,y)7→(x,y+ 1) or(x,y)7→(Tx,y+ 1−2r(x)). Ifψ α is a first-kind local chart andψ β is a second-kind local chart, the mapφ α,β is equal to(x,y)7→(Tx,y+1−r(x)). Ifψ α is a second-kind local chart andψ β is a first-kind local chart, the mapφ α,β is equal to(x,y)7→(x,y+ 1−r(x)). Sincer>1, there are no ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER COUNTEREXAMPLES TO RUELLE’S INEQUALITY33 ··· ··· • z • φ t (z) ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ Figure 3.3. The flow(φ t ) more possibilities for the mapφ α,β . The regularity ofrandTimplies the conclusion of the proposition. Let‖dφ‖ δ be the operator norm ofdφwith respect to the normg δ . Whenz∈M ∗ ∩φ −1 (M ∗ ), consider also the operator norm‖d z φ‖ e ofdφ with respect to the Euclidean normg e . Next proposition says that we can compare these operator norms by an explicit “nice” function. This fact will be fundamental in section 4 and justifies the manner in whichg δ has been defined. Proposition 3.6. —There exists an explicit measurable functionβ: M ∗ ∩φ −1 (M ∗ )→R + , defined in(3.3), such that for allz∈M ∗ ∩φ −1 (M ∗ ), we have ‖d z φ‖ δ 6β(z)‖d z φ‖ e .(3.2) Proof. —Using computations in the proof of Lemma 3.4 for allz∈ M ∗ ∩φ −1 (M ∗ )and for allv∈T z M, we obtain ‖d z φ(v)‖ δ φz 6C(φ(z))‖d z φ(v)‖ e φz 6C(φ(z))‖d z φ‖ e ‖v‖ e z 6C(φ(z))C(z)‖d z φ‖ e ‖v‖ δ z 6β 0 (z)‖d z φ‖ e ‖v‖ δ z , whereβ 0 (z) = (2 + 2|r ′ (x)|) max{(2 + 2|r ′ (x)|),(2 + 2|r ′ (Tx)|)}. Recall thatg δ andg e coincide onM\\R δ . LetK δ be the setK δ ={\[x,y\] : TOME 67 (2017), FASCICULE 1 34Felipe RIQUELME −r(T −1 x) +δ < y < r(x)−(1 +δ)}. Then, forβ(z)defined by β(z) =β 0 (z)1 M\\K δ (z) +1 K δ (z)(3.3) we conclude the proof of Proposition 3.6. Remark that, forz= \[x,y\]∈M ∗ ∩φ −1 (M ∗ ), the differentiald z φis represented in local coordinates by the identity matrix ify+ 1< r(x). If y+ 1> r(x), withx∈I\\{x i }, the differentiald z φis represented in local coordinates by the matrix d z φ= ( 10 −2r ′ (x) 1 ) . 3.3. A finite invariant measure There is a natural(φ t )-invariant measure ̃μonMdefined as follows. For a Borel setA⊂M, define ̃μ(A)as ̃μ(A) = ∫ 1 0 ∫ r(x) −r(T −1 x) 1 π −1 (A) (x,y)dydx. Since the Lebesgue measuremis invariant by translation andφ t acts by translations over the vertical lines, the measure ̃μis(φ t )-invariant. Proposition 3.7. —The measure ̃μis finite. Proof. —It is enough to prove that ∫ I r(x)dmis finite. Recall that on I i,1 ∪I i,2 we haver(x)62−log((x−x i )/b i ), whereas onI i,4 ∪I i,5 we have r(x)62−log((x i+1 −x)/b i ). Sincer| I i,3 ≡1, we obtain ∫ 1 0 ∫ r(x) 0 1dydx= ∑ i∈N ∫ I i r(x)dx 6 ∑ i∈N \[ 2 ( ∫ b i 0 2−log(x/b i )dx )\] +l i −2b i = ∑ i∈N 4b i +l i 65. Definition 3.8. —We define theφ-invariant probability measureμon Mas the normalized measure of ̃μ. ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER COUNTEREXAMPLES TO RUELLE’S INEQUALITY35 4. Proof of Theorem 1.1 In this section we will consider an arbitrary aperiodic countable interval exchange transformation(I,m,T)of entropyh∈(0,∞\]. We also consider the Riemannian manifold(M,g δ )constructed in section 3, theC ∞ -map φ=φ 1 defined as the time-one map of the suspension flow and theφ- invariant probability measureμas in the previous section. Recall thatg e is the Riemannian metric defined on the subsetM ∗ ofM, induced by the Euclidean metric onR 2 . 4.1. Some technical lemmas The aim of this subsection is to prove that under some additional con- dition on the roof functionr, easy to ensure, the assumption of Oseledec’s Theorem fordφanddφ −1 holds. Lemma 4.1. —Define the functionhby h(x) = { 2 + 2|r ′ (x)|ifx∈I\\S 0otherwise. If− ∑ i>0 b i logb i <∞, thenlog + (h)ism-integrable on I. Proof. —It suffices to prove thatx7→log(1 +|r ′ (x)|)ism-integrable onIsince h(x)6log(2) + log(1 +|r ′ (x)|). Note that, on the intervalI i , the roof function is defined by r(x) =α i (x)f i (x) + (1−α i (x)). It follows that|r ′ (x)|6|α ′ i (x)||f i (x)−1|+|f ′ i (x)|. Thus, we have |r ′ (x)|6                  b i /(x−x i )ifx∈I i,1 C/b i ifx∈I i,2 0ifx∈I i,3 C/b i ifx∈I i,4 b i /(x i+1 −x)ifx∈I i,5 , TOME 67 (2017), FASCICULE 1 36Felipe RIQUELME whereC>1is a constant depending onsup x∈R |α ′ (x)|<∞. In particular, we obtain ∫ 1 0 log + (1 +|r ′ (x)|)dx= ∞ ∑ i=0 5 ∑ k=1 ∫ I i,k log(1 +|r ′ (x)|)dx 6 ∞ ∑ i=0 ( ∫ I i,1 log ( 1 + b i x−x i ) dx + ∫ I i,2 log ( 1 + C b i ) dx+ ∫ I i,3 log(1)dx + ∫ I i,4 log ( 1 + C b i ) dx + ∫ I i,5 log ( 1 + b i x i+1 −x ) dx ) 6 ∞ ∑ i=0 (3 + log(2C))l i −b i log(b i ) 63 + log(2C)− ∞ ∑ i=0 b i log(b i ) <+∞. The above proof shows that the assumption− ∑ i>0 b i logb i <∞is crucial. If the interval exchange transformation has positive entropyh >0, it follows from Proposition 2.2 that− ∑ ∞ i=0 l i logl i =∞, so that we cannot chooseb i uniformly proportional tol i if we want− ∑ i>0 b i logb i <∞. Lemma 4.2. —If− ∑ i>0 b i logb i <∞, then ∫ log + ‖dφ‖ e dμ <∞and ∫ log + ‖dφ −1 ‖ e dμ <∞. Proof. —Notice that the setM ∗ ∩φ −1 (M ∗ )is a set of fullμ-measure, so that we can suppose thatz∈M ∗ ∩φ −1 (M ∗ ). In local coordinates the differential applicationd z fis represented by the identity ifz∈ {\[x,y\]∈ M:−r(T −1 x)< y < r(x)−1}and the matrix ( 10 −2r ′ (x) 1 ) , ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER COUNTEREXAMPLES TO RUELLE’S INEQUALITY37 ifz∈ {\[x,y\] :r(x)−1< y < r(x)}. In particular, we have‖d z φ‖ e 6 2 + 2|r ′ (x)|, so that we obtain ∫ log + ‖dφ‖ e d ̃μ= ∫ 1 0 ∫ r(x) r(x)−1 log + ‖d z φ‖ e dydx 6 ∫ 1 0 ∫ r(x) r(x)−1 log + (2 + 2|r ′ (x)|)dydx = ∫ log + (h)dm <+∞. Lemma 4.1 implies that the last integral is finite. The proof of the finiteness for the second integral is similar. The conclusion of Lemma 4.2 involves the norm‖dφ‖ e , but we need to work with‖dφ‖ δ . Lemma 4.3. —If− ∑ i>0 b i logb i <∞, then ∫ log + ‖dφ‖ δ dμ <∞and ∫ log + ‖dφ −1 ‖ δ dμ <∞. Proof. —From Inequality (3.2), we obtain ∫ log + ‖d z φ‖ δ dμ(z)6 ∫ log + (β(z)‖d z φ‖ e )dμ(z) 6 ∫ log + ‖d z φ‖ e dμ(z) + ∫ log + β(z)dμ(z). The first integral is finite thanks to Lemma 4.2. For the second integral, we have ∫ log + βd ̃μ= ∫ 1 0 ∫ −r(T −1 x)+δ −r(T −1 x) log + β(\[x,y\])dydx + ∫ 1 0 ∫ r(x) r(x)−(1+δ) log + β(\[x,y\])dydx 6(1 + 2δ) ∫ 1 0 2 log(2 + 2|r ′ (x)|) + log(2 + 2|r ′ (Tx)|)dx = 3(1 + 2δ) ∫ log + (h)dm. The last equality follows from the fact thatTpreserves the Lebesgue mea- suredxon(0,1). Lemma 4.1 allows to conclude the proof of Lemma 4.3 for‖dφ‖ δ . The proof of the finiteness for the second integral is similar. TOME 67 (2017), FASCICULE 1 38Felipe RIQUELME 4.2. The caseh=∞ Our initial goal is to find a counterexample to Ruelle’s inequality for a diffeomorphism of a noncompact manifold. Suppose that the measure- theoretic entropy ofTwith respect tomis infinite. Since the roof func- tionrism-integrable, it follows from Abramov’s formula that the en- tropy of the suspension flowh μ (φ)is infinite. Choose theb i ’s such that − ∑ i>0 b i logb i <∞. Lemma 4.3 above ensures that Oseledec’s Theorem applies, so that there exists almost-everywhere Lyapunov exponents satis- fying ∫ χ + dμ <∞. In particular, the measure-theoretic entropy ofφwith respect toμis greater than the sum of the positive Lyapunov exponents. This contradicts Ruelle’s inequality. 4.3. Computation of Lyapunov exponents In order to prove that the Lyapunov exponents forg δ areμ-a.e. equal to zero, we will first calculate the Lyapunov exponents for the Riemann- ian metricg e onM ∗ . AsM ∗ is not aφ-invariant set, we actually have to work on the set ⋂ k∈Z φ k (M ∗ ), which is a set of fullμ-measure. The key to compute the Lyapunov exponents forg e will be Lemma 4.4 (\[1, Proposi- tion 2.3.1\]) below. This lemma needs the ergodicity of the mapφ, which is not necessarily satisfied. In fact, sinceTis ergodic, the flow(φ t )is obvi- ously ergodic. This does not imply that all mapsφ t , for fixedt, are ergodic. But there always exist infinitely manyt∈Rsuch thatφ t is ergodic (see \[6, Theorem 3.2\]). Letτbe an ergodic time for the flow(φ t ), that is, the mapφ τ is ergodic with respect toμ. The definition of Lyapunov exponents implies that ev- ery Lyapunov exponent for the mapφ τ is of the formτλ i , whereλ i is a Lyapunov exponent forφ=φ 1 . In particular, if all Lyapunov exponents ofφ τ are equal to zero, the same holds for the Lyapunov exponents ofφ. Thus, we can suppose without loss of generality thatφis an ergodic map. We will show that its associated Lyapunov exponents are equal to zero. Proposition 4.4(Aaronson). —Let(X,B,m)be a Lebesgue space wheremis a probability measure. Suppose thatT:X→Xis an ergodic ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER COUNTEREXAMPLES TO RUELLE’S INEQUALITY39 transformation preservingm. Ifh:X→Ris a measurable function such that ∫ log + (|h|)dm <∞, we have lim n→∞ 1 n log + ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ n−1 ∑ i=0 h(T i x) ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ = 0 form-almost everyx∈X. Proof of Theorem 1.1. —Choose for alli>0a constant0< b i < l i /2, so that− ∑ i>0 b i logb i <∞. Letz= \[x,y\]∈ ⋂ k∈Z φ k (M ∗ ). For alln>0, letk(n)6n−1be the positive integer such thatφ n (z) = \[T k(n) x,y ′ \]for somey ′ ∈(−r(T k(n)−1 x),r(T k(n) x)). Hence, we have ‖d z φ n ‖ e 62 + 2 k(n) ∑ i=0 |r ′ (T i x)| 6 k(n) ∑ i=0 (2 + 2|r ′ (T i x)|)6 n−1 ∑ i=0 h(T i x). From Proposition 4.4, we obtain forμ-almost everyz∈M lim n→∞ 1 n log + ‖d z φ n ‖ e 6lim n→∞ 1 n log + ( n−1 ∑ i=0 h(T i x) ) = 0. In particular, the positive Lyapunov exponents forφ, with respect tog e , areμ-a.e. equal to zero since for allv∈T z Mwe have lim n→∞ 1 n log‖d z φ n (v)‖ φ n z 6lim n→∞ 1 n log(‖d z φ n ‖ e ‖v‖ e ) = lim n→∞ 1 n log‖d z φ n ‖ e = 0. The same argument forφ −1 implies that the negative Lyapunov exponents forφ, with respect tog e , areμ-a.e. equal to zero. Letλ δ (z,v)be the Lyapunov exponent forz∈Min the direction of v∈T z Mwith respect to the metricg δ . Ifz= \[x,y\]∈ ⋂ k∈Z φ k (M ∗ ), we TOME 67 (2017), FASCICULE 1 40Felipe RIQUELME have λ δ (z,v) = lim n→∞ 1 n log‖d z φ n (v)‖ δ φ n z 6lim n→∞ 1 n log‖d z φ n ‖ δ ‖v‖ δ z = lim n→∞ 1 n log‖d z φ n ‖ δ 6lim n→∞ 1 n log(2 + 2|r ′ (x)|) + lim n→∞ 1 n log max{(2 + 2|r ′ (x)|),(2 + 2|r ′ (T k(n) x)|)} + lim n→∞ 1 n log‖d z φ n ‖ e = lim n→∞ 1 n logh(T k(n) x). Since the functionlog + hism-integrable, Birkhoff Ergodic Theorem implies 06lim n→∞ 1 n logh(T k(n) x) = lim n→∞ k(n) n 1 k(n) logh(T k(n) x) 6lim n→∞ 1 k(n) log(h(T k(n) x) = 0, form-almost everyx∈I. Hence, the positive Lyapunov exponents forφ, with respect tog δ areμ-a.e. are equal to zero. The same argument forφ −1 implies this fact for the negative Lyapunov exponents. From Abramov’s formula we have h μ (φ) = h 2 ∫ rdm . Using the fact thath μ (φ s ) =|s|h μ (φ)for alls∈R, we have h μ (f) =h, forf=φ 2 ∫ rdm . Since the Lyapunov exponents forfare equal to zero μ-a.e., the conclusion of Theorem 1.1 follows. BIBLIOGRAPHY \[1\]J. Aaronson,An introduction to infinite ergodic theory, Mathematical Surveys and Monographs, vol. 50, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1997, xii+284 pages. \[2\]P. Arnoux, D. S. Ornstein&B. Weiss, “Cutting and stacking, interval exchanges and geometric models”,Israel J. Math.50(1985), no. 1-2, p. 160-168. ANNALES DE L’INSTITUT FOURIER COUNTEREXAMPLES TO RUELLE’S INEQUALITY41 \[3\]F. Blume, “An entropy estimate for infinite interval exchange transformations”, Math. Z.272(2012), no. 1-2, p. 17-29. \[4\]A. Katok, J.-M. Strelcyn, F. Ledrappier&F. Przytycki,Invariant manifolds, entropy and billiards; smooth maps with singularities, Lecture Notes in Mathemat- ics, vol. 1222, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1986, viii+283 pages. \[5\]F. Ledrappier, “Quelques propriétés des exposants caractéristiques”, inÉcole d’été de probabilités de Saint-Flour, XII—1982, Lecture Notes in Math., vol. 1097, Springer, Berlin, 1984, p. 305-396. \[6\]V. Losert&K. Schmidt, “A class of probability measures on groups arising from some problems in ergodic theory”, inProbability measures on groups (Proc. Fifth Conf., Oberwolfach, 1978), Lecture Notes in Math., vol. 706, Springer, Berlin, 1979, p. 220-238. \[7\]K. Nomizu&H. Ozeki, “The existence of complete Riemannian metrics”,Proc. Amer. Math. Soc.12(1961), p. 889-891. \[8\]V. I. Oseledec, “A multiplicative ergodic theorem. Characteristic Ljapunov, ex- ponents of dynamical systems”,Trudy Moskov. Mat. Obšč.19(1968), p. 179-210. \[9\]D. Ruelle, “An inequality for the entropy of differentiable maps”,Bol. Soc. Brasil. Mat.9(1978), no. 1, p. 83-87. \[10\]P. Walters,An introduction to ergodic theory, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 79, Springer-Verlag, New York-Berlin, 1982, ix+250 pages. Manuscrit reçu le 2 novembre 2015, révisé le 12 mai 2016, accepté le 12 mai 2016. Felipe RIQUELME IRMAR-UMR 6625 CNRS Université de Rennes 1 Campus de Beaulieu, bâtiments 22 et 23 263 avenue du Général Leclerc CS 74205 Rennes 35042 (France) felipe.riquelme@univ-rennes1.fr TOME 67 (2017), FASCICULE 1
