MARGULIS-RUELLE INEQUALITY FOR GENERAL MANIFOLDS GANG LIAO AND NA QIU Abstract.In this paper we investigate the Margulis-Ruelle inequality for general Riemannian manifolds (possibly noncompact and with boundary) and show that it always holds under integrable condition. 1.Introduction In the theroy of differentiable dynamical systems, Margulis-Ruelle inequality \[6\] is a fundamental formulation. This inequality establishes the bridge between the chaotic index metric entropy and the stable index Lyapunov exponent, being em- ployed especially frequently in the study of hyperbolic behaviors in various settings (uniformly, nonuniformly or partially hyperbolic systems). Letfbe a continuous map on a metric spaceM. Forf-invariant Borel proba- bility measureμand measurable partitionξofMwith partition entropyH μ (ξ) = ∫ logμ −1 (ξ(x))dμ <∞, the metric entropy offwith respect toξis given by h μ (f,ξ) = lim n→+∞ 1 n H μ ( n−1 ∨ i=0 f −i (ξ))(1.1) and the metric entropyh μ (f) offwith respect toμis defined as the supremum of (1.1) over allξwith finite partition entropy. Forfdifferentiable on a Riemannian manifoldM, relative to a directionv∈T x M withx∈M, Lyapunov exponent alongvis given by the limit lim n→+∞ 1 n log‖D x f n v‖,(1.2) which exists (possibly -∞), for almost every pointxof everyf-invariant Borel probability measureμby Oseledets theorem \[4, 1\] if ∫ log + ‖D x f‖dμ <∞, where log + t= max{logt,0}. Moreover, the finite dimension ofMbrings about exactly the same number of values of the limit (1.2), which we denote asλ i (f,x) (1≤i≤ dimM). When the manifoldMis compact and without boundary, the above two mecha- nisms could be linked together as the layout of Margulis-Ruelle inequality \[6\]: the metric entropy ofμis not beyond the sum of positive Lyapunov exponents: h μ (f)≤ ∫ ∑ λ i (f,x)>0 λ i (f,x)dμ.(1.3) Key words and phrases.Metric entropy, Lyapunov exponent, noncompactness, boundary. 2010Mathematics Subject Classification. 37A35, 37C40, 37D50. School of Mathematical Sciences, Center for Dynamical Systems and Differential Equations, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China; This research was partially supported by NSFC (11701402, 11790274), IEPJ and NSF (BK 20170327) of Jiangsu Province. 1 arXiv:2011.05711v1 \[math.DS\] 11 Nov 2020 2GANG LIAO AND NA QIU However, for general manifolds, the availability of (1.3) is unkown yet. There are many spaces which are expected to be taken into account, but not in the previous context, such asR n , Lie groups SL(n,R), billiard tables, moduli spaces, etc, where both noncompactness and boundary lead to the actual obstructions. As the case exhibits, ifMis noncompact, the inequality (1.3) possibly doesn’t hold \[5\]. With boundary permissible, (1.3) was dealt with in (\[2\]), involving systems on manifolds with finite capacity. Regarding the two aspects, in this paper, we investigate this problem in a general situation, i.e., for manifolds which are possibly both noncompact and with boundary. LetMbe a Riemannian mainfold,faC 1 map from an open subsetU⊂Mto M\\∂M, and Borel probability measureμonM\\∂Misf-invariant:μ(f −1 (B)) = μ(B) for any Borel setB⊂M\\∂M. The general setting is as follows: (A)Distortion onf: there exist 0< α <1,C,a >1 such that for anyx∈ U, y∈B(x,min{1, d a (x,∂M)}), ∣ ∣ ‖D x f‖−‖D y f‖ ∣ ∣ d(x,y) α ≤Cd 0 (x,∂M) −a , whered 0 (x,∂M) = min{d(x,∂M),d −1 (x,x 0 )}for any preassignedx 0 ∈M. (B)Integrability onμ: ∫ U max{log + ‖D x f‖,|logd 0 (x,∂M)|,|logρ b (x)|,logN b (x)}dμ <∞, whereρ b (x) for someb≥1 is the regular radius given by the minimum of% b (y) withd 0 (y,∂M)≥d 0 (x,∂M) and% b (y) = max{0< r≤1 :‖D w exp x 1 ‖ ≤b, ‖D x 2 exp −1 x 1 ‖ ≤b,∀x i ∈B(y,r), i= 1,2, w= exp −1 x 1 (x 2 )};N b (x) is the reg- ular tankage given by the minimal cardinality among covers of{y:d 0 (y,∂M)≥ d 0 (x,∂M)}by balls with regular radius. Remark.The properties ond 0 is independent of the choice ofx 0 . In fact,d −1 (x,x 0 ) represents the distance ofxrelative to the infinity: “away fromx 0 ” is equavlent to “close to the infinity”. Remark.(A)(B) are naturally satisfied ifMis compact and without boundary. In (A), we adopt‖D x f‖−‖D y f‖instead of‖D x f−D y f‖, which avoids the assump- tions on the local trivialization of manifolds as in\[2\]since we just compare real numbers‖D x f‖and‖D y f‖. In (B), the first one is a natrual property guarantee- ing the exisitence of Lyapunov exponents in Oseledets theorem, the next three could be verified in ususl analytic settings with some nondegenerate polynomial estimates, for example, for any measure absolute to Lebesgue measure such that •the density decreases polynomially of order bigger thandimMnear infin- ity and increases polynomially of order smaller thandimMnear boundary; •the regular radius decreases polynomially and the regular tankage increases polynomially near infinity and boundary. Theorem 1.1.LetMbe a Riemannian manifold andfaC 1 map from an open subsetU⊂MtoM\\∂Msatisfying (A). Then for anyf-invariant Borel probability measure satisfying(B), Margulis-Ruelle inequality holds true. The difficulties to establish (1.3) mainly arise from four aspects: firstly, the norm of derivarives may grow to the infinity; secondly, the regular neighborhoods on MARGULIS-RUELLE INEQUALITY FOR GENERAL MANIFOLDS3 whichfbehaves like diffeomorphisms may be destroyed by the boundary; thirdly, the distortion of manifold has no uniform bounds; and fourthly, the tankage may increase very largely when approaching the infinity and boundary. To overcome these difficulties, we take advantage of partitions which are adaptive to the above items and also we show the finiteness of such partitions’ entropy in Section 2 for the feasibility of later dynamical entropy computation. In Section 3, we carry on analysis of entropy for evolutions, with respect to the (singular) part near boundary and infinity, and the (regular) part away from boundary and infinity. In the present situation, we adopt infinite countable partition instead of finite partition as in \[2\], which will make the integrable condition of Theorem 1.1 more directly applicable to the proof of (1.3). 2.Construction of partitions and partition entropy For convenience, we consider the minimum betweend 0 and 1, which we denote byd ∗ . Notice that the properties in (A)(B) concerningd 0 also hold ford ∗ . Consider iterationsf m withm∈N. Associated to the influences of noncom- pactness and boundary, we define for anyn∈N, A n = { x∈U:Π m−1 j=0 ‖D f j (x) f‖ ∗ ≤2 n ,Π m−1 j=0 d ∗ (f j (x),∂M)≥2 −n , Π m−1 j=0 ρ b (f j (x))≥2 −n ,Π m−1 j=0 N b (f j (x))≤2 n } , wheret ∗ = max{t,1}fort∈R. It holds thatA 1 ⊂A 2 ⊂ ···and lim n→+∞ μ(A n ) = 1 by (B). We are going to construct partitions with box-like elements whose sizes are given differently accord- ing toA n . Denote d = dimM. Relative to anyx∈M\\∂M, under an orthonormal basis {e 1 ,···,e d }ofT x M, a box centered atywith sides 2a i >0 (1≤i≤d) is understood as exp x (Γ(exp −1 x (y);a 1 ,···,a d )) := exp x ({exp −1 x (y) + ∑ 1≤i≤d t i a i e i ,−1≤t i ≤1}). In particular, for anya >0, we denote Γ x (a) as the cube exp x (Γ(0;a,···,a)) and for any integerl≥1,Y(x,a,l) is defined as a partition of Γ x (a) consisting of subcubes exp x ({ ∑ 1≤i≤d k i a 2 l e i + ∑ 1≤i≤d t i a 2 l e i :−1≤t i ≤1}),1−2 l ≤k i ≤2 l −1, k i + 1 2 ∈Z. For anyε >0 and a subsetM 1 ⊂M, denoteF(M 1 ,ε) as a subset ofM 1 with maximal cardinality in sense that anyx,y∈M 1 satisfyd(x,y)> ε. As a matter of fact,M 1 ⊂ ∪ x∈F(M 1 ,ε) ̄ B(x,ε), where ̄ B(x,ε) is the closure of ballB(x,ε). Noting that exp −1 x (B(x,ρ b (x)) =B R d (0,ρ b (x)), by the control in regular scale there exists a constantC 0,1 >0 such that for anyx∈M\\∂M, 0< r≤ρ b (x), one has #F(B(x,r),ε)≤C 0,1 (d r ε e) d ,∀ε >0. Choosel 1 ∈Nsuch that l 1 > a, 1 2 n(l 1 −2m) < 1 √ d2 n+1 , C ( 1 2 n(l 1 −2m) ) α 2 an <2 1 m −1,∀n∈N, 4GANG LIAO AND NA QIU and define ε n = 1 √ d2 nl 1 ,∀n∈N. Fixn∈N. In order to coverA n , we takeF(A n ,ε n ) ={x (n) 1 ,···,x (n) k n }withk n = #F(A n ,ε n ). It holds that∪ 1≤i≤k n Γ x (n) i (ε n )⊃A n since Γ x (n) i (ε n )⊃ ̄ B(x (n) i ,ε n ). Moreover, Γ x (n) i (ε n )⊂ ̄ B(x (n) i , √ dε n ) = ̄ B(x (n) i , 1 2 nl 1 ),∀1≤i≤k n . We point out that the closure of any ballBcentered atx∈A n with radius≤ √ dε n intersects at most (4dbde) d such Γ x (n) i (ε n ). Indeed, if not, then the number ofx (n) i in ̄ B(x,2 √ dε n )⊂Γ x (2 √ dε n ) (⊂ ̄ B(x,2 dε n )⊂B(x, 1 2 n )⊂B(x,ρ b (x))) is more than (4dbde) d , which leads to at least two of them staying in the same element of the equi-partition of Γ x (2 √ dε n ) by cubes with sides 2·2 √ dε n 4dbde , thus their distance onMnot bigger than 2·2 √ dε n 4dbde √ db≤ε n , that contradicts the choice ofx (n) i . To obtain a partition ofA n , we define B n;1 =A n ∩Γ x (n) 1 (ε n ), B n;2 =A n ∩Γ x (n) 2 (ε n )\\B n;1 , B n;3 =A n ∩Γ x (n) 3 (ε n )\\(∪ 1≤i≤2 B n;i ), . . . B n;k n =A n ∩Γ x (n) k n (ε n )\\(∪ 1≤i≤k n −1 B n;i ). Fors≥n+ 1, takingF(A s \\A s−1 ,ε s ) ={x (s) 1 ,···,x (s) k s }withk s = #F(A s \\ A s−1 ,ε s ), define B s;1 = (A s \\A s−1 )∩Γ x (s) 1 (ε s ), B s;2 = (A s \\A s−1 )∩Γ x (s) 2 (ε s )\\B s;1 , . . . B s;k s = (A s \\A s−1 )∩Γ x (s) k s (ε s )\\(∪ 1≤i≤k s −1 B s;i ). Then we may get two measurable partitions P= { B s,i : 1≤i≤k s , s≥n } , ̃ P= { E s =∪ 1≤i≤k s B s,i :s≥n } . In fact, one may see thatE n =A n andE s =A s \\A s−1 fors≥n+ 1. MARGULIS-RUELLE INEQUALITY FOR GENERAL MANIFOLDS5 We continue by usinglto partition eachB s;i into smaller sets. To be precise, denoteY(x (s) i ,ε s ,l) ={Γ (s,i,l) 1 ,Γ (s,i,l) 2 ,···,Γ (s,i,l) 2 ld }and let B s;i,1 =B s;i ∩Γ (s,i,l) 1 , B s;i,2 =B s;i ∩Γ (s,i,l) 2 \\B s;i,1 , . . . B s;i,2 ld =B s;i ∩Γ (s,i,l) 2 ld \\(∪ 1≤j≤2 ld −1 B s;i,j ). Then, for anyl≥1, one can obtain a partition as the following P (l) n = { B s;i,j : 1≤i≤k s ,1≤j≤2 ld , s≥n } . It is obvious that ̃ P ≺ P ≺ P (l) n mod 0 for anyl≥1. For convenience of state- ment, we denoteP (0) n =P. In the above construction,nstands for the regularity relative to the bounday and infinity;lis used to make the size of partitions arbitrarily small. The choice of lwill be confirmed in the estimate of entropy with respect to evolutions. Note thatA s is covered by at most 2 s balls with regular size (which is≤1) and each of them can be further covered by at mostC 0,1 (d 4 ε s e) d balls with radius ε s 4 (each such ball is contained in a ball centered atA s with radius ε s 2 ), thus k s ≤2 s ·C 0,1 (d 4 ε s e) d . Moreover, each element ofP (0) n is partitioned by 2 ld cubes in the constructoin ofP (l) n . Thus, for anys≥n, # { B s;i,j : 1≤i≤k s ,1≤j≤2 ld } ≤2 s ·C 0,1 (d 4 ε s e) d ·2 ld =C 0,1 (d4 √ de) d 2 s(1+l 1 d)+ld :=C 0 2 s(1+l 1 d)+ld . Before going any further, we first show the finiteness of partition entropyH μ (P (l) n ) so that the constructed partitions are feasible in the computation of dynamical en- tropy. Lemma 2.1.H μ (P (l) n )<∞for any integerl≥0. Proof.Denote p(x) = max { Π m−1 j=0 ‖D f j (x) f‖ ∗ ,Π m−1 j=0 d −1 ∗ (f j (x),∂M), Π m−1 j=0 ρ −1 b (f i (x)),Π m−1 j=0 N b (f j (x)) } . Note that ifx∈B s;i,j withs≥n+ 1, thenx /∈A s−1 , sop(x)>2 s−1 . It follows that ∫ logp(x)dμ(x) = +∞ ∑ s=n ∫ E s logp(x)dμ(x) ≥ ∫ E n logp(x)dμ(x) + +∞ ∑ s=n+1 ∫ E s log 2 s−1 dμ(x).(2.1) 6GANG LIAO AND NA QIU Together with (B), we deduce +∞ ∑ s=n μ(E s )s <+∞. Therefore, H μ (P (l) n )≤ +∞ ∑ s=n μ(E s ) log(C 0 2 s(1+l 1 d)+ld )<+∞.  3.Estimates on entropy for dynamical evolutions This section is devoted to the estimate of metric entropy ofgby using the constructed partitionsP (l) n . By Lemma 2.1, the entropy ofP (l) n is finite, thus h μ (g,P (l) n ) =lim t→+∞ 1 t H μ ( t−1 ∨ i=0 g −i (P (l) n )) =lim t→+∞ 1 t ( H μ (P (l) n ) + t−1 ∑ i=1 H μ (g −i (P (l) n )| i−1 ∨ j=0 g −j (P (l) n )) ) =lim t→+∞ 1 t ( t−1 ∑ i=1 H μ (g −i (P (l) n )| i−1 ∨ j=0 g −j (P (l) n )) ) ≤H μ (g −1 (P (l) n )|P (l) n ). Furthermore, it holds that H μ (g −1 (P (l) n )|P (l) n )=H μ (g −1 (P (l) n )∨g −1 ( ̃ P)|P (l) n ) =H μ (g −1 ( ̃ P)|P (l) n ) +H μ (g −1 (P (l) n )|P (l) n ∨g −1 ( ̃ P)) := I + II. (1) Estimate onI. Observe that by Lemma 2.1, I≤H μ (g −1 ( ̃ P)) =H μ ( ̃ P)≤H μ (P (0) n )<+∞.(3.1) Moreover,μ(E n )→1 asn→∞, thus, by (2.1) and the integrability of logp(x), lim n→∞ +∞ ∑ s=n+1 ∫ E s log 2 s−1 dμ(x) = 0. So, takingnlarge enough, one can make +∞ ∑ s=n+1 μ(E s ) log 2 sl 1 d <1. Although we can obtain I is finite by (3.1), the partition entropyH μ (P (0) n ) depend- ing ong=f m may be very large asmincreases. For the estimate of dynamical entropy, by takingllarge, we are going to deduce a controllable linear bound for I relative to the increase ofm. MARGULIS-RUELLE INEQUALITY FOR GENERAL MANIFOLDS7 Notice that I = ∑ B∈P (l) n +∞ ∑ s=n −μ(g −1 (E s )∩B) log μ(g −1 (E s )∩B) μ(B) = ∫ \[ +∞ ∑ s=n − μ(g −1 (E s )∩P (l) n (x)) μ(P (l) n (x)) log μ(g −1 (E s )∩P (l) n (x)) μ(P (l) n (x)) \] dμ(x) = +∞ ∑ s=n ∫ \[ − μ(g −1 (E s )∩P (l) n (x)) μ(P (l) n (x)) log μ(g −1 (E s )∩P (l) n (x)) μ(P (l) n (x)) \] dμ(x). Since I| l=0 <+∞, there existsL≥nsuch that +∞ ∑ s=L+1 ∫ \[ − μ(g −1 (E s )∩P (0) n (x)) μ(P (0) n (x)) log μ(g −1 (E s )∩P (0) n (x)) μ(P (0) n (x)) \] dμ(x)<1. Recalling thatP (0) n ≺P (l) n for everyl≥1, by the convexity of−xlogx, we have ∫ \[ +∞ ∑ s=L+1 − μ(g −1 (E s )∩P (l) n (x)) μ(P (l) n (x)) log μ(g −1 (E)∩P (l) n (x)) μ(P (l) n (x)) \] dμ(x) = +∞ ∑ s=L+1 ∫ \[ − μ(g −1 (E s )∩P (l) n (x)) μ(P (l) n (x)) log μ(g −1 (E s )∩P (l) n (x)) μ(P (l) n (x)) \] dμ(x) ≤ +∞ ∑ s=L+1 ∫ \[ − μ(g −1 (E s )∩P (0) n (x)) μ(P (0) n (x)) log μ(g −1 (E s )∩P (0) n (x)) μ(P (0) n (x)) \] dμ(x) <1. For the expression of I, the termP (l) n stays below in the form of conditional entropy. In order to make I small, we can letP (l) n much finer, i.e., letllarge. To be precise, we letlsatisfy 1 2 l−2−m(L+1) < min{1−2 − 1 m ,2 −1− 1 m } 2 L , ( 1 2 l−2−m(L+1) ) α C2 aL <2 1 m −1. ForB=B k;i,j contained in someE k , denotes B = min{s:g(B)∩E s 6=∅}. We split the discussion into two cases: (i)s B > L. Then +∞ ∑ s=n −μ(g −1 (E s )∩B) log μ(g −1 (E s )∩B) μ(B) = +∞ ∑ s=L+1 −μ(g −1 (E s )∩B) log μ(g −1 (E s )∩B) μ(B) . So, ∑ s B >L +∞ ∑ s=n −μ(g −1 (E s )∩B) log μ(g −1 (E s )∩B) μ(B) ≤ ∫ \[ +∞ ∑ s=L+1 − μ(g −1 (E s )∩P (l) n (x)) μ(P (l) n (x)) log μ(g −1 (E s )∩P (l) n (x)) μ(P (l) n (x)) \] dμ(x)<1. 8GANG LIAO AND NA QIU (ii)s B ≤L. Lemma 3.1.There exists a constant integerC 1 >0such thatg(B)⊂A s B +C 1 m . Proof.Step 1: diam(g(B))≤ 1 2 l−2 . By definition,B⊂Γ (k,i,l) j ⊂Γ x (k) i (ε k )⊂ ̄ B(x (k) i , 1 2 kl 1 ). For anyy∈ ̄ B(x, 1 2 kl 1 ) withx∈A k , ∣ ∣ ‖D y f‖−‖D x f‖ ∣ ∣ ≤Cd(x,y) α d −a ∗ (x,∂M)≤C( 1 2 kl 1 ) α 2 ak <2 1 m −1, d(f(x),f(y))≤d(x,y)max u∈ ̄ B(x, 1 2 kl 1 ) ‖D u f‖≤ 1 2 kl 1 (2 k + 1) ≤ 1 2 kl 1 2 k+1 ≤ 1 2 k(l 1 −2) . By induction, suppose for 1≤j≤m−1, ∣ ∣ ‖D f j−1 (y) f‖−‖D f j−1 (x) f‖ ∣ ∣ ≤C( 1 2 k(l 1 −2(j−1)) ) α 2 ak <2 1 m −1, d(f j (x),f j (y))≤ 1 2 k(l 1 −2j) . Then one has ∣ ∣ ‖D f j (y) f‖−‖D f j (x) f‖ ∣ ∣ ≤Cd(f j (x),f j (y)) α d −a ∗ (f j (x),∂M)≤C( 1 2 k(l 1 −2j) ) α 2 ak <2 1 m −1, d(f j+1 (x),f j+1 (y))≤ 1 2 k(l 1 −2j) (2 k + 1)≤ 1 2 k(l 1 −2(j+1)) . Hence, ‖D y g‖≤Π m−1 j=0 (‖D f j (x) f‖+ 2 1 m −1)≤Π m−1 j=0 (2 1 m ‖D f j (x) f‖ ∗ )≤2 k+1 , which gives rise to diam(g(B))≤diam(B)max y∈ ̄ B(x (k) i , 1 2 kl 1 ) ‖D y g‖≤ 2 2 kl 1 +l 2 k+1 ≤ 1 2 l−2 . Step 2: Choosey∈g(B)∩E s B , thend(f j (u),f j (y))≤ 1 2 l−2−j(L+1) for any u∈ ̄ B(y, 1 2 l−2 ) and 0≤j≤m−1. Note that whend(u,y)≤ 1 2 l−2 , ‖D u f‖ ≤ ‖D y f‖+d(u,y) α Cd(y,∂M) −a ≤2 s B + ( 1 2 l−2 ) α C2 as B ≤2 s B + ( 1 2 l−2 ) α C2 aL ≤2 s B + 1≤2 s B +1 ≤2 L+1 . By induction, suppose for 1≤j≤m−1,d(f j−1 (u),f j−1 (y))≤ 1 2 l−2−(j−1)(L+1) and ‖D u 1 f‖≤2 L+1 for anyu 1 withd(u 1 ,f j−1 (y))≤ 1 2 l−2−(j−1)(L+1) , then MARGULIS-RUELLE INEQUALITY FOR GENERAL MANIFOLDS9 d(f j (u),f j (y))≤d(f j−1 (u),f j−1 (y))2 L+1 ≤ 1 2 l−2−j(L+1) . Moreover, for anyu 1 withd(u 1 ,f j (y))≤ 1 2 l−2−j(L+1) , ‖D u 1 f‖ ≤ ‖D f j (y) f‖+d(u 1 ,f j (y)) α Cd(f j (y),∂M) −a ≤2 s B + ( 1 2 l−2−j(L+1) ) α C2 as B ≤2 s B + ( 1 2 l−2−j(L+1) ) α C2 aL ≤2 s B + 1≤2 L+1 . Step 3:u∈A s B +C 1 m for some constant integerC 1 >0. We need check the properties ofd ∗ ,‖‖ ∗ ,ρ b andN b foru. 1 ◦ Π m−1 j=0 d ∗ (f j (u),∂M)≥2 −s B −1 . By the choice ofl, for 0≤j≤m−1, d(f j (u),∂M)≥d(f j (y),∂M)−d(f j (u),f j (y))≥2 − 1 m d(f j (y),∂M), d(f j (u),x 0 )≤d(f j (y),x 0 ) +d(f j (u),f j (y))≤2 1 m max{d(f j (y),x 0 ),1}, which implies that d ∗ (f j (u),∂M)≥2 − 1 m d ∗ (f j (y,∂M). So, Π m−1 j=0 d ∗ (f j u),∂M)≥(2 − 1 m ) m Π m−1 i=0 d ∗ (f j (z),∂M)≥2 −s B −1 . 2 ◦ Π m−1 j=0 ‖D f j (u) f‖ ∗ ≤2 s B +1 . ∣ ∣ ‖D f j (u) f−‖D f j (y) f‖ ∣ ∣ ≤d(f j (u),f j (y)) α Cd(f j (y),∂M) −a ≤2 1 m −1, which gives ‖D f j (u) f‖ ∗ ≤2 1 m ‖D f j (y) f‖ ∗ . So, Π m−1 j=0 ‖D f i (u) f‖ ∗ ≤(2 1 m ) m Π m−1 j=0 ‖D f j (z) f‖ ∗ ≤2 s B +1 . 3 ◦ Π m−1 j=0 ρ b (f j (u))≥2 −s B −1 . For anyzsatisfyingd 0 (z,∂M)≥d 0 (f j (u),∂M), there existsz ′ ∈ ̄ B(z, 1 2 l−2−j(L+1) ) satisfyingd 0 (z ′ ,∂M)≥d 0 (f j (y),∂M). Since d(z,z ′ )≤ 1 2 l−2−j(L+1) ≤(1−2 − 1 m )ρ b (f j (y)), so, % b (z)≥2 − 1 m ρ b (f j (y)). By the arbitrariness ofz, we have ρ b (f j (u))≥2 − 1 m ρ b (f j (y)). So, Π m−1 j=0 ρ b (f j (u))≥(2 − 1 m ) m Π m−1 i=0 ρ b (f j (z))≥2 −s B −1 . 4 ◦ Π m−1 j=0 N b (f j (u))≤C m 1,0 2 s B for some constant integerC 1,0 >0. 10GANG LIAO AND NA QIU Ifd 0 (f j (y),∂M)≤d 0 (f j (u),∂M), it is obvious thatN b (f j (u))≤N b (f j (y)). Assumed 0 (f j (y),∂M)> d 0 (f j (u),∂M). Then ρ b (f j (u))≤ρ b (f j (y))≤2 1 m ρ b (f j (u)). So, there exists a constant integerC 1,0 >1, such that any ballB(v,ρ b (f j (y))) with d 0 (v,∂M)≥d 0 (f j (y),∂M) can be covered byC 1,0 balls centered atB(v,ρ b (f j (y))) with radius 1 2 ρ b (f j (u))≥2 − 1 m −1 ρ b (f j (y)), which we denote as B(y v,1 , 1 2 ρ b (f j (u))),···,B(y v,C 1 , 1 2 ρ b (f j (u))). Moreover, for anyzsatisfyingd 0 (z,∂M)≥d 0 (f j (u),∂M), there existsz ′ ∈ ̄ B(z, 1 2 l−2−j(L+1) ) ⊂B(z, 1 2 ρ b (f j (u))) satisfyingd 0 (z ′ ,∂M)≥d 0 (f j (y),∂M). Thus, if{v:d 0 (v,∂M)≥ d 0 (f j (y),∂M)}is covered byB(v 1 ,ρ b (f j (y))),···,B(v N b (f j (y)) ,ρ b (f j (y))), then B(y v i ,j ,ρ b (f j (u))), 1≤i≤N b (f j (y)), 1≤j≤C 1,0 , constitute a cover of {z:d 0 (z,∂M)≥d 0 (f j (u),∂M)}, which gives N b (f j (u))≤C 1,0 N b (f j (y)). So, Π m−1 j=0 N b (f j (u))≤C m 1,0 Π m−1 j=0 N b (f j (y))≤C m 1,0 2 s B . By 1 ◦ , 2 ◦ , 3 ◦ , 4 ◦ , denotingC 1 =d logC 1,0 log 2 e, we haveu∈A s B +C 1 m . Together with the arbitrariness ofu, we deduce thatg(B)⊂A s B +C 1 m .  Notice thatg(B)∩E j =∅for anyj < s B , so ∑ s B ≤L +∞ ∑ s=n −μ(g −1 (E s )∩B) log μ(g −1 (E s )∩B) μ(B) = ∑ s B ≤L s B +C 1 m ∑ s=s B −μ(g −1 (E s )∩B) log μ(g −1 (E s )∩B) μ(B) ≤ ∑ s B ≤L (C 1 m+ 1)e −1 μ(B)≤(C 1 m+ 1)e −1 . Therefore, I = ( ∑ s B >L + ∑ s B ≤L ) +∞ ∑ s=n −μ(g −1 (E s )∩B) log μ(g −1 (E s )∩B) μ(B) ≤1 + (C 1 m+ 1)e −1 . MARGULIS-RUELLE INEQUALITY FOR GENERAL MANIFOLDS11 (2) Estimate onII. We have II = +∞ ∑ s=n ∑ F∈P (l) n ∑ B∈P (l) n −μ(F∩g −1 (E s )∩g −1 (B)) log μ(F∩g −1 (E s )∩g −1 (B)) μ(F∩g −1 (E s )) = ∑ F∈P (l) n ∑ B∈P (l) n ,B⊂E n −μ(F∩g −1 (B)) log μ(F∩g −1 (B)) μ(F∩g −1 (E n )) + +∞ ∑ s=n+1 ∑ F∈P (l) n ∑ B∈P (l) n ,B⊂E s −μ(F∩g −1 (B)) log μ(F∩g −1 (B)) μ(F∩g −1 (E s )) := II 1 + II 2 . On the one hand, for anyF⊂ P (l) n , ifFis in someE k , then diam(g(F))≤ 2 2 kl 1 +l 2 k+1 ≤ 1 2 l−2 , which implies exp −1 x (s) i (g(F)∩Γ x (s) i (ε s )) is contained in a cube with sides 2b 2 l−2 wheneverg(F)∩Γ x (s) i (ε s )6=∅. Note that there exist at mostk s such Γ x (s) i (ε s ), and each of them is partitioned by cubes with sides 2ε s 2 l = 2 2 sl 1 +l √ d in the constructoin ofP (l) n . So, for anys≥n+ 1, #{B∈P (l) n :B∩g(F)6=∅, B⊂E s }≤k s ( d( 2b 2 l−2 )/( 2 2 sl 1 +l √ d )e+ 2 ) d ≤C 2 2 4sl 1 d , whereC 2 =C 0 (d4b √ de+ 2) d . Hence, II 2 ≤ +∞ ∑ s=n+1 ∑ F∈P (l) n μ(F∩g −1 (E s )) log(C 2 2 4sl 1 d ) = +∞ ∑ s=n+1 μ(g −1 (E s )) log(C 2 2 4sl 1 d ) = +∞ ∑ s=n+1 μ(E s ) log(C 2 2 4sl 1 d )<logC 2 + 4. On the other hand, II 1 = ∑ F∈P (l) n ,F⊂E n ∑ B∈P (l) n ,B⊂E n −μ(F∩g −1 (B)) log μ(F∩g −1 (B)) μ(F∩g −1 (E n )) + ∑ F∈P (l) n ,F⊂∪ s≥n+1 E s ∑ B∈P (l) n ,B⊂E n −μ(F∩g −1 (B)) log μ(F∩g −1 (B)) μ(F∩g −1 (E n )) := II 1,1 + II 1,2 . For anyF⊂E s ,s≥n+ 1, it holds that #{B∈P (l) n :B∩g(F)6=∅, B⊂E n }≤k n ( d( 2b 2 l−2 )/( 2 2 nl 1 +l √ d )e+ 2 ) d ≤C 2 2 4nl 1 d , 12GANG LIAO AND NA QIU which implies II 1,2 ≤ ∑ F∈P (l) n ,F⊂∪ s≥n+1 E s μ(F∩g −1 (E n )) log(C 2 2 4nl 1 d ) ≤μ(∪ s≥n+1 E s ) log(C 2 2 4nl 1 d )≤logC 2 + 4. Now, it is left to estimate II 1,1 , which is exactly the term contributing Lyapunov exponent. Observe that II 1,1 ≤ ∑ F∈P (l) n ,F⊂E n log #{B∈P (l) n ,B⊂E n :g(F)∩B6=∅}·μ(F∩g −1 (E n )) ≤ ∑ F∈P (l) n ,F⊂E n log #{B∈P (l) n ,B⊂E n :g(F)∩B6=∅}·μ(F). To estimate the last term in the above inequality, we consider a standard ar- gument in advance. For anyβ >0, denote byξ β a partition ofR d into boxes as follows: { \[q 1 β,(q 1 + 1)β\]×···×\[q d β,(q d + 1)β\] :q i ∈Z,1≤i≤d } . For any box Γ(x;v 1 ,···,v d ;a 1 ,···,a d ) ={x+ ∑ 1≤i≤d t i a i v i ,0≤t i ≤1}with unit vectorsv i and sidesa i >0 (1≤i≤d), denote byφ(Γ(x;v 1 ,···,v d ;a 1 ,···,a d )) the minimum number of elements inξ 1 whose union covers Γ(x;v 1 ,···,v d ;a 1 ,···,a d ). Lemma 3.2(Lemma 12.5 of \[3\]).There exists a constantc >0such that for any boxΓ(x;v 1 ,···,v d ;a 1 ,···,a d ), φ(Γ(x;v 1 ,···,v d ;a 1 ,···,a d ))≤cΠ d i=1 max{a i ,1}. Denote by (D x g) ∧κ the linear map on theκ-th exterior algebra of the tangent spaceT x Minduced byD x gand let‖(D x g) ∧ ‖= max 1≤κ≤d ‖(D x g) ∧κ ‖. Lemma 3.3.There existsC 3 >0such that for anyF∈ P (l) n andF⊂E n , we have for anyx∈F, #{B∈P (l) n ,B⊂E n :g(F)∩B6=∅}≤C 3 ‖(D x g) ∧ ‖. Proof.Note thatFis a subset of some Γ n,i,l j . The image of Γ n,i,l j byginter- sects at most (4dbde) d elements Γ x (n) v (ε n ). By a scalling of the size, applying Lemma 3.2, it holds that for Γ n,i,l j := exp x (n) u (Γ( ∑ 1≤i≤d k i ε n 2 −l e i ;e 1 ,···,e d ; 2ε n 2 −l ,···,2ε n 2 −l ) := exp x (n) u (Γ), #{G∈ξ 2ε n 2 −l : (D exp −1 x (n) u (x) (exp −1 x (n) v gexp x (n) u ))(Γ)∩G6=∅} ≤c‖D exp −1 x (n) u (x) (exp −1 x (n) v gexp x (n) u )‖ ≤cb 2 ‖(D x g) ∧ ‖. MARGULIS-RUELLE INEQUALITY FOR GENERAL MANIFOLDS13 Γ Γ ̃ g D ̃x ̃ g (D ̃x ̃ g) −1 G ̃ g (D ̃x ̃ g) −1 (G) Γ Distortion of boxes Denote ̃x= exp −1 x (n) u (x), ̃g= exp −1 x (n) v gexp x (n) u . Take arbitraryG∈ξ 2ε n 2 −l such that (D ̃x ̃g) −1 (G)∩Γ6=∅. Then for anyy,z∈(D ̃x ̃g) −1 (G)∩Γ, we denoteτ= y−z ‖y−z‖ andσto be the line segment linkingyandz. Then, for the chosenn, takingl sufficently large, we have d( ̃g(y), ̃g(z)) = ∫ σ ‖(D z ̃g)τ‖dz ≤ ∫ σ (‖(D ̃x ̃g)τ‖+ 1)dz ≤diam(G) + lenghth(σ) ≤diam(G) + diam(Γ) ≤ 2 2 nl 1 +l + 2 2 nl 1 +l = 4 2 nl 1 +l . Hence, #{G∈ξ 2ε n 2 −l :G∩ ̃g(Γ)6=∅} ≤cb 2 ‖(D x g) ∧ ‖·(d 8 2 nl 1 +l 2ε n 2 −l e+ 2) d =cb 2 ‖(D x g)‖ ∧ (d4 √ de+ 2) d . ConsideringBas the part of the image ofGby exp x (n) v in the construction ofP (l) n and lettingC 3 =cb 2 (d4 √ de+ 2) d (4dbde) d , one gets the estimate of the lemma. By Lemma 3.3, we have 14GANG LIAO AND NA QIU II 1,1 ≤ ∑ F∈P (l) n ,F⊂E n ∫ F log(C 3 ‖(D x g) ∧ ‖)dμ ≤logC 3 + ∫ M log‖(D x g) ∧ ‖dμ = logC 3 + ∫ M log‖(D x f m ) ∧ ‖dμ. Proof of Theorem 1.1. For anym∈N, sufficently largenandl, we have obtained h μ (f m ,P (l) n )≤I + II 2 + II 1,2 + II 1,1 ≤1 + (C 1 m+ 1)e −1 + (logC 2 + 4) + (logC 2 + 4) + logC 3 + ∫ M log‖(D x f m ) ∧ ‖dμ. Lettingl→+∞, we get h μ (f m ) ≤1 + (C 1 m+ 1)e −1 + 2(logC 2 + 4) + logC 3 + ∫ M log‖(D x f m ) ∧ ‖dμ. Therefore, h μ (f) = lim m→+∞ 1 m h μ (f m )≤C 1 e −1 + ∫ M ∑ λ i (f,x)>0 λ i (f,x)dμ. Furthermore, h μ (f) = lim m→+∞ 1 m h μ (f m )≤lim m→+∞ 1 m ∫ M ∑ λ i (f m ,x)>0 λ i (f m ,x)dμ = ∫ M ∑ λ i (f,x)>0 λ i (f,x)dμ. This completes the proof of Theorem 1.1. References \[1\] G. Froyland, S. Lloyd and A. Quas, Coherent structures and isolated spectrum for Perron- Frobenius cocycles,Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems.,30, 729-756, 2010. \[2\] A. Katok, J. Strelcyn, F. Ledrappier and F. Przytycki, Invariant manifolds, entropy and billiards; smooth maps with singularities,Lecture Notes in Math.,1222, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1986. \[3\] R. Ma ̃n ́e, Ergodic theory and differentiable dynamics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1987. \[4\] V. I. Oseledets, A multiplicative ergodic theorem,Trans. Moscow Math. Soc.,19, 197-231, 1968. \[5\] F. Riquelme, Counterexamples to Ruelle’s inequality in the noncompact case,Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble).,67, 23-41, 2017. \[6\] D. Ruelle, An inequality for the entropy of differentiable maps,Bol. Soc. Bras. Mat.,9, 83-88, 1978. Email address:lg@suda.edu.cn Email address:na.qiu@qq.com
