WHAT ARE LYAPUNOV EXPONENTS, AND WHY ARE THEY INTERESTING? AMIE WILKINSON Introduction At the 2014 International Congress of Mathematicians in Seoul, South Korea, Franco- Brazilian mathematician Artur Avila was awarded the Fields Medal for “his profound contributions to dynamical systems theory, which have changed the face of the field, using the powerful idea of renormalization as a unifying principle.” 1 Although it is not explicitly mentioned in this citation, there is a second unifying concept in Avila’s work that is closely tied with renormalization: Lyapunov (or characteristic) exponents. Lya- punov exponents play a key role in three areas of Avila’s research: smooth ergodic theory, billiards and translation surfaces, and the spectral theory of 1-dimensional Schr ̈odinger operators. Here we take the opportunity to explore these areas and reveal some under- lying themes connecting exponents, chaotic dynamics and renormalization. But first, what are Lyapunov exponents? Let’s begin by viewing them in one of their natural habitats: the iterated barycentric subdivision of a triangle. When the midpoint of each side of a triangle is connected to its opposite vertex by a line segment, the three resulting segments meet in a point in the interior of the triangle. The barycentric subdivision of a triangle is the collection of 6 smaller triangles determined by these segments and the edges of the original triangle: Figure 1.Barycentric subdivision. As the process of barycentric subdivision starts with a triangle and produces triangles, it’s natural to iterate the process, barycentrically subdividing the six triangles obtained at the first step, obtaining 36 triangles, and so on, as in Figure 2. Notice that as the subdivision gets successively finer, many of the triangles produced by subdivision get increasingly eccentric and needle-like. We can measure the skinniness of a triangleTvia theaspect ratioα(T) = area(T)/L(T) 2 , whereL(T) is the maximum Date: August 10, 2016. 1 http://www.mathunion.org/general/prizes/2014/prize-citations/ 1 arXiv:1608.02843v1 \[math.DS\] 9 Aug 2016 2AMIE WILKINSON Figure 2.Iterating barycentric subdivision, from \[54\]. of the side lengths; observe that similar triangles have the same aspect ratio. Suppose we fix a rule for labeling the triangles in a possible subdivision 1 through 6, roll a six- sided fair die and at each stage choose a triangle to subdivide. The sequence of triangles T 1 ⊃T 2 ⊃...obtained have aspect ratiosα 1 ,α 2 ,..., whereα n =α(T n ). Theorem 0.1(\[54\], see also \[16\]).There exists a real numberχ≈0.0446945>0such that almost surely: lim n→∞ 1 n logα n =−2χ. In other words, if triangles are chosen successively by a random toss of the die, then with probability 1, their aspect ratios will tend to 0 in thenth toss at an exponential rate governed by exp(−2nχ). The same conclusion holds with the same value ofχif the initial equilateral triangle is replaced by any marked triangle. This magical numberχis a Lyapunov exponent. We return to this example at the end of the next section. Lyapunov exponents make multiple appearances in the analysis of dynamical systems. After defining basic concepts and explaining examples in Section 1, we describe in Sec- tions 2–4 a sampling of Avila’s results in smooth ergodic theory, Teichm ̈uller theory and spectral theory, all of them tied to Lyapunov exponents in a fundamental way. We explore some commonalities of these results in Section 5. Section 6 is devoted to a discussion of some themes that arise in connection with Lyapunov exponents. WHAT ARE LYAPUNOV EXPONENTS, AND WHY ARE THEY INTERESTING?3 1.Cocycles, exponents and hyperbolicity Formally, Lyapunov exponents are quantities associated to a cocycle over a measure- preserving dynamical system. A measure-preserving dynamical system is a triple (Ω,μ,f), where (Ω,μ) is a probability space, andf: Ω→Ω is a measurable map that preserves the measureμ, meaning thatμ(f −1 (X)) =μ(X) for every measurable setX⊂Ω. We say that (Ω,μ,f) isergodicif the onlyf-invariant measurable sets haveμ-measure 0 or 1. Equivalently, (Ω,μ,f) is ergodic if the only functionsφ∈L 2 (Ω,μ) satisfyingφ◦f=φ are the constant functions. Anyf-invariant measureμcan be canonically decomposed into ergodic invariant measures, a fact that allows us to restrict attention to ergodic measures in some contexts, simplifying statements. The measures in such a decomposi- tion are calledergodic components,and there can be uncountably many of them. The process of ergodic decomposition is a bit technical to describe; we refer the reader to \[50\] for more details. 1.1.Examples of measure-preserving systems.Here is a list of three types of measure-preserving systems that we will refer to again in the sections that follow. Rotations on the circle.On the circle Ω =R/Z, letf α (x) =x+α(mod 1), where α∈Ris fixed. The mapf α preserves the Lebesgue-Haar measureμ(that assigns to an intervalI∈R/Zits length|I|). The mapf α is ergodic with respect toμif and only if αis irrational. This has a straightforward proof: consider the equationφ◦f α =φ, for someφ∈L 2 (R/Z,μ), and solve for the Fourier coefficients ofφ. Whenα=p/qis rational, every pointω∈Ω is periodic, satisfyingf q (ω) =ω. Each ωthen determines an ergodicf α -invariant probability measureν ω obtained by averaging the Dirac masses along the orbit ofω: ν ω := 1 q ( δ ω +δ f α (ω) +···+δ f q−1 α (ω) ) . Eachν ω is an ergodic component of the measureμ, and hence there are uncountably many such components. Whenαis irrational,μis theuniquef α -invariant Borel probability measure. A homeomorphism of a compact metric space that has a unique invariant measure is called uniquely ergodic— a property that implies ergodicity and more. Unique ergodicity is mentioned again in Section 2 and is especially relevant to the discussion of Schr ̈odinger operators with quasiperiodic potentials in Section 4. There is nothing particularly special about the circle, and the properties of circle rotations listed here generalize easily to rotations on compact abelian groups. Toral automorphisms.Let Ω =T 2 :=R 2 /Z 2 , the 2-torus. Fix a matrixA∈SL(2,Z). ThenAacts linearly on the plane by multiplication and preserves the latticeZ 2 , by virtue of having integer entries and determinant 1. It therefore induces a mapf A :T 2 →T 2 of the 2-torus, a group automorphism. The areaμis preserved because det(A) = 1. Such an automorphism is ergodic with respect toμif and only if the eigenvalues ofAare λandλ −1 , with|λ|>1. This can be proved by examining the Fourier coefficients of φ∈L 2 (T 2 ,μ) satisfyingφ◦f A =φ: composing withf A permutes the Fourier coefficients ofφby the adjoint action ofA, and the assumption onAimplies that ifφis not constant 4AMIE WILKINSON there must be infinitely many identical coefficients, which violates the assumption that φ∈L 2 (T 2 ,μ). 2 In contrast to the irrational rotationf α , the mapf A has many invariant Borel prob- ability measures, even whenf A is ergodic with respect to the areaμ. For example, as we have just seen, every periodic point off A determines an ergodic invariant measure, andf A has infinitely many periodic points. This is a simple consequence of the Pigeon- hole Principle, using the fact thatA∈SL(2,Z): for every natural numberq, the finite collection of points{( p 1 q , p 2 q ) :p 1 ,p 2 ∈ {0,...,q−1}} ⊂T 2 is permuted byf A , and so each element of this set is fixed by some power off A . Bernoulli shifts.Let Ω ={1,...,k} N be the set of all infinite, one sided strings ω= (ω 1 ,ω 2 ,···) on the alphabet{1,...,k}. Endowed with the product topology, the space Ω is compact, metrizable, and homeomorphic to a Cantor set. The shift map σ: Ω→Ω is defined byσ(ω) k =ω k+1 . In other words, the image of the sequence ω= (ω 1 ,ω 2 ,···) is the shifted sequenceσ(ω) = (ω 2 ,ω 3 ,···). Any nontrivial probability vectorp= (p 1 ,...,p k ) (i.e. withp i ∈(0,1), and ∑ i p i = 1) defines a product measure μ=p N supported on Ω. 3 The triple ( Ω,σ,μ= (p 1 ,...,p k ) N ) is called aBernoulli shift, andμis called aBernoulli measure. It is not hard to see that the shiftσpreservesμ and is ergodic with respect toμ. The shift mapσ: Ω→Ω manifestly has uncountably many invariant Borel probabil- ity measures, in particular the Bernoulli measures (p 1 ,...,p k ) N , but the list does not end there. In addition to periodic measures (supported on orbits of periodic strings (ω 1 ,...,ω q ,ω 1 ,...,ω q ,...)), there areσ-invariant probability measures on Ω encoding every measure preserving continuous dynamical system 4 — in this sense the shift is a type of universal dynamical system. 1.2.Cocycles.LetM d×d be thed 2 -dimensional vector space ofd×dmatrices (real or complex). Acocycleis a pair (f,A), wheref: Ω→Ω andA: Ω→M d×d are measurable maps. We also say thatAis acocycle overf. For eachn >0, andω∈Ω, we write A (n) (ω) =A(f n−1 (ω))A(f n−2 (ω))···A(f(ω))A(ω), wheref n denotes then-fold composition offwith itself. Forn= 0, we setA (n) (ω) =I, and if bothfand the values of the cocycleAare invertible, we also define, forn≥1: A (−n) (ω) = (A (n) (f −n+1 (ω))) −1 =A −1 (f −n+1 (ω))···A −1 (ω). One comment about the terminology “cocycle:” whileAis colloquially referred to as a cocycle overf, to fit this definition into a proper cohomology theory, one should reserve the term cocycle for the function (n,ω)→A (n) (ω) and callAthegeneratorof this (1-)cocycle. See \[11\] for a more thorough discussion of this point. 2 In higher dimensions, a matrixA∈SL(d,Z) similarly induces an automorphismf A ofT n :=R n /Z n . The same argument using Fourier series shows thatf A is ergodic if and only ifAdoes not have a root of 1 as an eigenvalue. 3 The product measure has a simple description in this context: settingC i (j) :={ω∈Ω :ω i =j}, the measureμ= (p 1 ,...,p k ) N is defined by the properties:μ(C i (j)) =p j , andμ(C i (j)∩C i ′ (j ′ )) =p j p j ′ , for anyi6=i ′ ∈Nandj,j ′ ∈ {1,...,k}. 4 Subject to some constraints involving invertibility and entropy. WHAT ARE LYAPUNOV EXPONENTS, AND WHY ARE THEY INTERESTING?5 A fruitful way of viewing a cocycleAoverfis as a hybrid dynamical system (f,A) : Ω× M d×d →Ω×M d×d defined by (f,A)(ω,B) = (f(ω),A(ω)B). Note that thenth iterate (f,A) n of this hybrid map is the hybrid map (f n ,A (n) ). The vector bundle Ω×M d×d can be reduced in various ways to obtain associated hybrid systems, for example, the map (f,A) : Ω×R d →Ω×R d defined by (f,A)(ω,v) = (f(ω),A(ω)v). Thus a natural generalization of a cocycle overfis a mapF:B → B, whereπ:B →Ω is a vector bundle, andFacts linearly on fibers, withπ◦F=f◦ π. We will use this extended definition of cocycle to define the derivative cocycle in Subsection 1.4. 1.3.Lyapunov exponents.Letf: Ω→Ω be a measurable map (not necessarily pre- serving a probability measure). We say that a real numberχis aLyapunov exponent for the cocycleA: Ω→M d×d overfat the pointω∈Ω if there exists a nonzero vector v∈R d , such that (1)lim n→∞ 1 n log‖A (n) (ω)v‖=χ. Here‖·‖is a fixed norm on the vector space spaceM d×d . The limit in (1), when it exists, does not depend on the choice of such a norm (exercise). Oseledets proved in 1968 \[55\] that if (f,Ω,μ) is a measure-preserving system, andA is a cocycle overfsatisfying the integrability condition log‖A‖ ∈L 1 (Ω,μ), then for μ-almost everyω∈Ω and for every nonzerov∈R d the limit in (1) exists. This limit assumes at mostddistinct valuesχ 1 (ω)> χ 2 (ω)>···> χ k(ω) (ω). Each exponentχ i (ω) is achieved with a multiplicityd i (ω) equal to the dimension of the space of vectorsv satisying (1) withχ=χ i , and these multiplicities satisfy ∑ k(ω) i=1 d i (ω) =d. If the cocycleAtakes values inSL(d,R), then, since log det(A(ω))≡log(1) = 0, we obtain that ∑ k(ω) i=1 d i (ω)χ i (ω) = 0. Thus ifAtakes values inSL(2,R), then the exponents are of the form−χ(ω)≤0≤χ(ω). If (Ω,μ,f) is ergodic, then the functionsk(ω),χ i (ω) andd i (ω), are constantμ-almost everywhere. In this case, the essential valuesχ 1 ,...,χ k ∈Rare called theLyapunov exponents ofAwith respect to the ergodic measureμ. 1.4.Two important classes of cocycles.Random matrix cocyclesencode the behav- ior of a random product of matrices. Let{A 1 ,...,A k } ⊂M d×d be a finite collection of matrices. Suppose we take ak-sided die and roll it repeatedly. If the die comes up Figure 3.A 30-sided Dungeons and Dragons die. with the numberj, we choose the matrixA j , thus creating a sequenceA ω 1 ,A ω 2 ,..., whereω= (ω 1 ,ω 2 ,...)∈{1,...,k} N . This process can be packaged in a cocycleAover 6AMIE WILKINSON a measure preserving system (Ω,μ,σ) by setting Ω ={1,...,k} N ,μ= (p 1 ,...,p k ) N , wherep j is the probability that the die showsjon a roll, and settingσto be the shift map. The cocycle is defined byA(ω) =A ω 1 . ThenA (n) (ω) is simply the product of the firstnmatrices produced by this process. More generally, suppose thatηis a probability measure on the set of matricesM d×d . The space Ω =M N d×d of sequences (M 1 ,M 2 ,...) carries the product measureη N , which is invariant under the shift mapσ, where as aboveσ(M 1 ,M 2 ,...) = (M 2 ,M 3 ,...). There is a natural cocycleA: Ω→M d×d given byA((M 1 ,M 2 ,...)) =M 1 . The matrices A (n) (ω), forω∈Ω are justn-fold random products of matrices chosen independently with respect to the measureη. In the study of smooth dynamical systems thederivative cocycleis a central player. Letf:M→Mbe aC 1 map on a compactd-manifoldM. Suppose for simplicity that the tangent bundle is trivial:TM=M×R d . Then for eachx∈M, the derivative D x f:T x M→T fx Mcan be written as a matrixD x f∈M d×d . The mapx7→D x fis called the derivative cocycle. The Chain Rule implies that ifA=Dfis a derivative cocycle, thenD x f n =A (n) (x). The case whereTMis not trivializable is easily treated: either one trivializesTMover a suitable subset ofM, or one expands the definition of cocycle as described at the end of Subsection 1.2: the mapDf:TM→TMis an automorphism of the vector bundle TM, covering the mapf. Lyapunov exponents for the derivative cocycle are defined analogously to (1). We fix a continuous choice of norms{‖·‖ x :T x M→R ≥0 :x∈M}, for example the norms given by a Riemannian metric (more generally, such a family of norms is called aFinsler). Thenχis a Lyapunov exponent forDfatx∈Mif there existsv∈T x Msuch that (2)lim n→∞ 1 n log‖D x f n v‖ f n (x) =χ. SinceMis compact, the Lyapunov exponents ofDfdo not depend on the choice of Finsler. The conclusions of Oseledets’s theorem hold analogously for derivative cocycles with respect to anyf-invariant measure onM. A simple example of a derivative cocycle is provided by the toral automorphism f A :T 2 →T 2 described above. Conveniently, the tangent bundle toT 2 is trivial, and the derivative cocycle is the constant cocycleD x f A =A. 1.5.Uniformly hyperbolic cocycles.A special class of cocycles whose Lyapunov ex- ponents are nonzero with respect toanyinvariant probability measure are the uniformly hyperbolic cocycles. Definition 1.1.A continuous cocycleA: Ω→M d×d over a homeomorphismf: Ω→Ω of a compact metric spaceΩisuniformly hyperbolicif there exists an integern≥1, and for everyω∈Ω, there is a splittingR d =E u (ω)⊕E s (ω)into subspaces that depend continuously onω, such that for everyω∈Ω: (i)A(ω)E u (ω) =E u (f(ω)), andA(ω)E s (ω) =E s (f(ω)), (ii)v∈E u (ω) =⇒ ‖A (n) (ω)v‖≥2‖v‖, and (iii)v∈E s (ω) =⇒ ‖A (−n) (ω)v‖≥2‖v‖. The definition is independent of choice of norm‖·‖; changing norm onM d×d simply changes the value ofn. The number 2 in conditions (ii) and (iii) can be replaced by WHAT ARE LYAPUNOV EXPONENTS, AND WHY ARE THEY INTERESTING?7 any fixed real number greater than 1; again this only changes the value ofn. Notice that measure plays no role in the definition of uniform hyperbolicity. It is a topological property of the cocycle. For short, we say that (f,A) is uniformly hyperbolic. A trivial example of a uniformly hyperbolic cocycle is the constant cocycleA(ω)≡ A 0 ∈SL(2,R), whereA 0 is any matrix whose eigenvaluesλ > λ −1 satisfyλ >1. Here the splittingR 2 =E u (ω)⊕E s (ω) is the constant splitting into the sum of theλand λ −1 eigenspaces ofA 0 , respectively. For a constant cocycle, the Lyapunov exponents are defined everywhere and are also constant; for thisSL(2,R) cocycle, the exponents are ±logλ. A nontrivial example of a uniformly hyperbolic cocycle is any nonconstant, continuous A: Ω→SL(2,R) with the property that the entries ofA(ω) are all positive, for any ω∈Ω. In this case the splitting is given by E u (ω) := ⋂ n≥0 A (n) (f −n (ω)) (C + ),andE u (ω) := ⋂ n≥0 A (−n) (f n (ω)) (C − ), whereC + denotes the set of (x,y)∈R 2 withxy≥0, andC − is the set of (x,y) with xy≤0. For an example of this type, the Lyapunov exponents might not be everywhere defined, and their exact values with respect to a particular invariant measure are not easily determined, although they will always be nonzero where they exist (exercise). In this example and the previous one, the base dynamicsf: Ω→Ω are irrelevant as far as uniform hyperbolicity of the cocycle is concerned. Hyperbolicity is anopenproperty of both the cocycleAand the dynamicsf: if (f,A) is uniformly hyperbolic, and ˆ fand ˆ Aand both uniformly close (i.e. in theC 0 metric) to fandA, then ( ˆ f, ˆ A) is uniformly hyperbolic. The reason is that, as in the example just presented, uniform hyperbolicity is equivalent to the existence of continuously varying cone familiesC + (ω),C − (ω)⊂R d , jointly spanningR d for eachω∈Ω, and an integer n≥1 with the following properties:A (n) (ω) (C + (ω))⊂ C + (f n (ω));A (−n) (ω) (C − (ω))⊂ C − (f −n (ω)); vectors inC + (ω) are doubled in length byA (n) (ω); and vectors inC − (ω) are doubled in length byA (−n) (ω). The existence of such cone families is preserved under small perturbation. 1.6.Anosov diffeomorphisms.A diffeomorphismf:M→Mwhose derivative cocy- cle is uniformly hyperbolic is calledAnosov. Again, one needs to modify this definition when the tangent bundleTMis nontrivial: the splitting ofR d in the definition is replaced by a splittingTM=E u ⊕E s into subbundles — that is, a splittingT x M=E u (x)⊕E s (x) into subspaces, for eachx∈M, depending continuously onx. The norm‖·‖on the spaceM d×d is replaced by a Finsler, as in the discussion at the end of Subsection 1.4. SinceMis assumed to be compact, the Anosov property does not depend on the choice of Finsler. Anosov diffeomorphisms remain Anosov after aC 1 -small perturbation, by the open- ness of uniform hyperbolicity of cocycles. More precisely, theC 1 distanced C 1 (f,g) between two diffeomorphisms is the sum of theC 0 distance betweenfandgand theC 0 distance betweenDfandDg; thus iffis Anosov andd C 1 (f,g) is sufficiently small, then Dgis hyperbolic, and sogis Anosov. Such agis often called aC 1 small perturbation off. 8AMIE WILKINSON The toral automorphismf A :T 2 →T 2 , withA= ( 2 1 1 1 ) is Anosov; since the de- rivative cocycle is constant, the splittingR 2 =E u (x)⊕E s (x), forx∈T 2 does not depend onx: as above,E u (x) is the expanding eigenspace forAcorresponding to the larger eigenvalueλ= (3 + √ 5)/2>1, andE s (x) is the contracting eigenspace forA corresponding to the smaller eigenvalueλ −1 = (3− √ 5)/2<1. In this example, we can choosen= 1 to verify that uniform hyperbolicity holds in the definition. The Lyapunov exponents of this cocycle are±logλ. The mapg  :T 2 →T 2 given by (3)g  (x,y) = (2x+y+sin(2π(x+y)),x+y) is aC 1 small perturbation off A ifis sufficiently small, and sog  is Anosov for small . Moreover, since detD (x,y) g  ≡1, the mapg  preserves the areaμonT 2 ; we shall see in the next section thatg  is ergodic with respect toμ. The two Lyapunov exponents ofg  with respect to the ergodic measureμare±logλ  , whereλ  < λfor6= 0 small. There are several ways to see this: one way to prove it is to compute directly using the ergodic theorem (Theorem 2.1) that7→λ  is a smooth map whose local maximum is achieved at= 0. In contrast tof, the exponents ofg  are not constant onT 2 but depend on the in- variant measure. For example, the averaged Dirac measuresν x 1 =δ (0,0) andν x 2 = 1 3 ( δ ( 1 2 , 1 2 ) +δ (0, 1 2 ) +δ ( 1 2 ,0) ) corresponding to the fixed pointx 1 = (0,0) and the periodic pointx 2 = ( 1 2 , 1 2 ) respectively, are both invariant and ergodic underg  , for any. Di- rect computation with the eigenvalues of the matricesD x 1 g  andD x 2 g 3  shows that the Lyapunov exponents with respect toν x 1 andν x 2 are different for6= 0. 1.7.Measurably (nonuniformly) hyperbolic cocycles.We say that a cocycleA over (Ω,μ,f) ismeasurably hyperbolicif forμ-a.e. pointω∈Ω, the exponentsχ j (ω) are all nonzero. Since the role played by the measure is important in this definition, we sometimes say thatμis a hyperbolic measure for the cocycleA, orAis hyperbolic with respect toμ. Uniformly hyperbolic cocycles over a homeomorphismfare hyperbolic with respect to anyf-invariant probability measureμ(exercise). An equivalent definition of measurable hyperbolicity that neatly parallels the uniformly hyperbolic condition is:Ais hyperbolic with respect to thef-invariant measureμif there exist a setX⊂Ω withμ(X) = 1 and splittingsR d =E u (ω)⊕E s (ω) depending measurably onω∈X, such that for every ω∈Xthere exists an integern=n(ω)≥1 such that conditions (i)-(iii) in Definition 1.1 hold. The splitting into unstable and stable spaces is not necessarily continuous (or even globally defined on Ω) and the amount of timen(ω) to wait for doubling in length to occur depends onω; for these reasons, measurably hyperbolic cocycles are often referred to as “nonuniformly hyperbolic.” 5 In this nonuniform setting it is possible for a cocycle to be hyperbolic with respect one invariant measure, but not another. 5 The terminology is not consistent across fields. In smooth dynamics, a cocycle over a measurable sys- tem that is measurably hyperbolic is called nonuniformly hyperbolic, whether it is uniformly hyperbolic or not. In the spectral theory community, a cocycle is called nonuniformly hyperbolic if it is measurably hyperbolic butnotuniformly hyperbolic. WHAT ARE LYAPUNOV EXPONENTS, AND WHY ARE THEY INTERESTING?9 0 1 z H T a b c T !z Figure 4.The upper half planeHis the space of marked triangles, up to Euclidean similarity. The triangleTon the left corresponds to the pointz∈Hon the right. A measurably hyperbolic cocycle lurks behind random barycentric subdivision. The random process generating the triangles in iterated barycentric subdivision can be en- coded in a cocycle as follows. First, we identify upper half planeH⊂Cwith the space of marked triangles (modulo Euclidean similarity) by sending a triangleTwith vertices cyclically labeleda,b,cto a pointz∈Hby rescaling, rotating and translating, sending ato 0,bto 1 andctoz. See Figure 4. 0 1 z 1 2 1+z 3 0 1 2(1+z) 3 T (1) T (2) T (3) T (4) T (5) T (6) T (1) T Figure 5.A M ̈obius transformation that selects the first triangle in barycentric subdivision. Labelling cyclically the trianglesT (1) ,T (2) ,...,T (6) in the subdivision as in Figure 5, the M ̈obius transformationB(z) = 2(z+ 1)/3 sends the marked triangleTto the marked triangleT (1) . The involutions pictured in Figure 6 generate the symmetric groupS 3 , whose nontrivial elements we labelP 1 ,...,P 5 . A bit of thought shows that 10AMIE WILKINSON the transformationsB,BP 1 ,...,BP 5 are the 6 maps of the plane sendingTto the rescaled triangles in the subdivision. Fixing an identification of the lower half plane with the upper half plane viaz7→z, the action of these 6 transformations onHare identified with the projective action of 6 elementsA 1 ,...,A 6 ofPGL(2,R), whereBis identified with ( 2/ √ 6 2/ √ 6 03/ √ 6 ) ,P 1 is identified with ( 10 1−1 ) ,P 2 is identified with ( 0 1 1 0 ) , andP 3 is identified with ( −1 1 01 ) . 0 1 H 1 2 P 1 P 2 P 3 Figure 6.Three involutions generating the symmetric groupS 3 : inver- sion in the circles|z|= 1 and|z−1|= 1, and reflection across the line Re(z) = 1 2 . Thus random barycentric subdivision is governed by a random matrix cocycle over a Bernoulli shift. If repeated rolls of the die generate the sequenceω 1 ,ω 2 ,...with ω i ∈ {1,...,6}, then thenth triangleT n (ω) generated is the projective image of ( i 1 ) underA (n) (ω), and an exercise shows that the aspect ratio ofT n (ω) is given by: α(T n (ω)) =‖(0,1)·A (n) (ω)‖ −2 . We thus obtain the formula lim n→∞ 1 n logα(T n (ω)) =−2 lim n→∞ 1 n log ∥ ∥ ∥ (0,1)·A (n) (ω) ∥ ∥ ∥ , and out pops the Lyapunov exponentχ= lim n→∞ 1 n log ∥ ∥ (0,1)·A (n) (ω) ∥ ∥ . 6 Numerical simulation gives the valueχ≈0.0446945, but the fact that this number is positive follows from a foundational result of Furstenberg (stated precisely as a special case in Theorem 6.1) that underlies some of Avila’s results as well. The upshot is that a random product of matrices inSL(2,R) (orPGL(2,R)) cannot have exponents equal to 0, except by design. In particular, if the matrices do not simultaneously preserve a 6 As with eigenvalues, the Lyapunov exponents for left and right matrix multiplication coincide. WHAT ARE LYAPUNOV EXPONENTS, AND WHY ARE THEY INTERESTING?11 collection of one or two lines, and the group generated by the matrices is not compact, then the exponents with respect to any nontrivial Bernoulli measure will be nonzero. These conditions are easily verified for the barycentric cocycle. Details of this argument about barycentric subdivision can be found in \[54\] and the related paper \[16\]. The barycentric cocycle isnotuniformly hyperbolic, as can be seen by examining the sequence of triangles generated by subdivision on Figure 2: at each stage it is always possible to choose some triangle with aspect ratio bounded below, even though most triangles in a subdivision will have smaller aspect ratio than the starting triangle. For products of matrices inSL(d,R), uniform hyperbolicity must be carefully engineered, but for random products, measurable hyperbolicity almost goes without saying. A longstanding problem in smooth dynamics is to understand which diffeomorphisms have hyperbolic derivative cocycle with respect to some natural invariant measure, such as volume (See \[19\]). Motivating this problem is the fact that measurable hyperbolicity produces interesting dynamics, as we explain in the next section. 2.Smooth ergodic theory Smooth ergodic theory studies the dynamical properties of smooth maps from a statis- tical point of view. A natural object of study is a measure-preserving system (M,vol,f), whereMis a smooth, compact manifold without boundary equipped with a Riemannian metric, vol is the volume measure of this metric, normalized so that vol(M) = 1, and f:M→Mis a diffeomorphism preserving vol. It was in this context that Boltzmann originally hypothesized ergodicity for ideal gases in the 1870’s. Boltzmann’s non-rigorous formulation of ergodicity was close in spirit to the following statement of the pointwise ergodic theorem for diffeomorphisms: Theorem 2.1.Iffis ergodic with respect to volume, then its orbits are equidistributed, in the following sense: for almost everyx∈M, and any continuous functionφ:M→R: (4)lim n→∞ 1 n ( φ(x) +φ(f(x)) +···φ(f n−1 (x)) ) = ∫ M φdvol. As remarked previously, an example of an ergodic diffeomorphism is the rotationf α onR/Z, forαirrational. In fact this transformation has a stronger property of unique ergodicity, which is equivalent to the property that the limit in (4) exists forevery x∈R/Z. 7 While unique ergodicity is a strong property, the ergodicity of irrational rotations is fragile; the ergodic mapf α can be perturbed to obtain the non-ergodic map f p/q , whereα≈p/q. Another example of an ergodic diffeomorphism, at the opposite extreme of the rota- tions in more than one sense, is the automorphismf A of the 2-torus induced by multi- plication by the matrixA= ( 2 1 1 1 ) with respect to the areaμ. In spirit, this example is closely related to the Bernoulli shift, and in fact its orbits can be coded in such a way as to produce a measure-preserving isomorphism with a Bernoulli shift. As observed in the previous section, ergodicity of this map can be proved using Fourier analysis, but there is a much more robust proof, due to Anosov \[1\], who showed that anyC 2 Anosov diffeomorphism preserving volume is ergodic with respect to volume. 7 This is a consequence of Weyl’s equidistribution theorem and can be proved using elementary anal- ysis. See, e.g. \[37\]. 12AMIE WILKINSON 2.1.Ergodicity of Anosov diffeomorphisms and Pesin theory.Anosov’s proof of ergodicity has both analytic and geometric aspects. For the mapf A , it follows several steps: (1) The expanding and contracting subbundlesE u andE s of the splittingTT 2 = E u ⊕E s are tangent to foliationsW u andW s ofT 2 by immersed lines. These lines are parallel to the expanding and contracting eigendirections ofAand wind densely around the torus, since they have irrational slope. The leaves of this pair of foliations are perpendicular to each other, sinceAis symmetric. (2) A clever application of the pointwise ergodic theorem (presented here as a special case in Theorem 2.1) shows that anyφ∈L 2 (T 2 ,μ) satisfyingφ◦f=φis, up to a set of area 0, constant along leaves of the foliationW u , and (again, up to a set of area 0) constant along leaves ofW s . This part of the argument goes back to Eberhard Hopf’s study of geodesics in negatively curved surfaces in the 1930’s. (3) Locally, the pair of foliationsW u andW s are just (rotated versions of) intervals parallel to thexandyaxes. In these rotated coordinates,φ(x,y) is a measurable function constant a.e. inxand constant a.e. iny. Fubini’s theorem then implies that such aφmust be constant a.e. This conclusion holds in local charts, but sinceT 2 is connected,φmust be constant. (4) Since anyf-invariant functionφ∈L 2 (T 2 ,μ) is constant almost everywhere with respect toμ, we conclude thatf A is ergodic with respect toμ. The same proof works for any smooth, volume-preserving Anosov diffeomorphism — in particular, for the mapsg  defined in (3) — if one modifies the steps appropriately. The foliations by parallel lines in step (1) are replaced by foliations by smooth curves (or submanifolds diffeomorphic to someR k , in higher dimension). Step (2) is almost the same, since it uses only volume preservation and the fact that the leaves ofW u andW s are expanded and contracted, respectively. Step (3) is the most delicate to adapt and was Anosov’s great accomplishment, and Step (4) is of course the same. The ergodicity of Anosov diffeomorphisms is also a consequence of the much stronger property of being measurably encoded by a Bernoulli shift. This so-calledBernoulli propertyimplies that Anosov diffeomorphisms are mixing with respect to volume, mean- ing that for anyL 2 functionφ, we have ∫ M φ·φ◦f n →( ∫ M φ) 2 asn→ ∞. Visually, sets are mixed up by Anosov diffeomorphisms: see Figure 4, which explains whyf A is sometimes referred to as the “cat map.” The mapg  will similarly do a number on a cat. The proof of the Bernoulli property for Anosov diffeomorphisms builds the Anosov-Hopf proof of ergodicity. The Anosov-Hopf argument has the additional advantage that it can be adapted to prove ergodicity for systems that are not Bernoulli. As explained in Subsection 1.6, anyC 1 -small perturbation of an Anosov diffeomor- phism is Anosov, andC 2 Anosov diffeomorphisms preserving volume are ergodic. Hence volume-preservingC 2 Anosov diffeomorphisms arestably ergodic:the ergodicity cannot be destroyed by aC 1 small perturbation, in marked contrast with the irrational rotation f α . The Anosov condition thus has powerful consequences in smooth ergodic theory. But, like uniformly hyperbolic matrix products, Anosov diffeomorphisms are necessarily con- trived. In dimension 2, the only surface supporting an Anosov diffeomorphism is the torusT 2 , and conjecturally, the only manifolds supporting Anosov diffeomorphisms be- long to a special class called the infra-nilmanifolds. On the other hand,everysmooth WHAT ARE LYAPUNOV EXPONENTS, AND WHY ARE THEY INTERESTING?13 Figure 7.The action off A on a cat, from \[2\]. A cat is drawn in a square fundamental domain forT 2 at the lower left. Its image underAis shown in the parallelogram, and it is reassembled into another fundamental domain to show its image underf A . The image of the cat underf 2 A is depicted at right. manifold supports a volume-preserving diffeomorphism that is hyperbolic with respect to volume, as was shown by Dolgopyat and Pesin in 2002 \[29\]. In the 1970’s Pesin \[57\] introduced a significant innovation in smooth ergodic theory: a nonuniform, measurable analogue of the Anosov-Hopf theory. Under the assumption that a volume preserving diffeomorphismfis hyperbolic with respect to volume, Pesin showed that volume has at most countably many ergodic components with respect to f. Starting with Oseledets’s theorem, and repeatedly employing Lusin’s theorem that every measurable function is continuous off of a set of small measure, Pesin developed an ergodic theory of smooth systems that has had numerous applications. Some limitiations of Pesin theory are: first, that it begins with the hypothesis of measurable hyperbolicity, which is a condition that is very hard to verify except in special cases, and second, without additional input, measurable hyperbolicity does not imply ergodicity, as the situation of infinitely many ergodic components can and does occur \[28\]. 2.2.Ergodicity of “typical” diffeomorphisms.The question of whether ergodicity is a common property among volume-preserving diffeomorphisms of a compact manifold Mis an old one, going back to Boltzmann’s ergodic hypothesis of the late 19th Century. We can formalize the question by fixing a differentiability classr∈\[1,∞\] and considering the set Diff r vol (M) ofC r , volume-preserving diffeomorphisms ofM. This is a topological space in theC r topology, and we say that a property holdsgenerically inDiff r vol (M) (orC r generically, for short) if it holds for allfin a countable intersection of open and dense subsets of Diff r vol (M). 8 8 Since Diff r vol (M) is a Baire space, properties that hold generically hold for a dense set, and two properties that hold generically separately hold together generically. 14AMIE WILKINSON Di↵ 1 vol (M) ergodic, measurably hyperbolic di↵eomorphisms di↵eomorphisms with entropy 0 Figure 8.Generically, positive entropy implies ergodicity and measur- able hyperbolicity. Oxtoby and Ulam \[56\] proved in 1939 that a generic volume-preservinghomeomor- phismof a compact manifold is ergodic. At the other extreme, KAM (Kolmogorov- Arnol’d-Moser) theory, introduced by Kolmogorov in the 1950’s \[43\], implies that er- godicity isnota dense property, let alone a generic one, in Diff ∞ vol (M), if dim(M)≥2. The general question of whether ergodicity is generic in Diff r vol (M) remains open for r∈\[1,∞), but we now have a complete answer for any manifold whenr= 1 under the assumption ofpositive entropy. Entropy is a numerical invariant attached to a measure preserving system that measures the complexity of orbits. The rotationf α has entropy 0; the Anosov mapf A has positive entropy log(λ). By a theorem of Ruelle, positivity of entropy means that there issomepositive volume subset ofMon which the Lyapunov exponents are nonzero insomedirections. Theorem 2.2(Avila, Crovisier, Wilkinson \[7\]).Generically inDiff 1 vol (M), positive en- tropy implies ergodicity and moreover measurable hyperbolicity with respect to volume. See Figure 8. This result was proved in dimension 2 by Ma ̃n ́e-Bochi \[51, 17\] and dimension 3 by M.A. Rodriguez-Hertz \[58\]. Positive entropy is ana prioriweak form of chaotic behavior that can be confined to an invariant set of very small measure, with trivial dynamics on the rest of the manifold. Measurable hyperbolicity, on the other hand, means that at almost every pointallof the Lyapunov exponents of the derivative cocycleDfare nonzero. Conceptually, the proof divides into two parts: (1)C 1 generically, positive entropy implies nonuniform hyperbolicity. One needs to go from some nonzero exponents on some of the manifold to all nonzero exponents on almost all of the manifold. Since the cocycle and the dynamics are intertwined, carrying this out is a delicate matter. This relies on the fact that theC 1 topology is particularly well adapted to the problem. On the one hand, constructingC 1 -small perturbations with a desired property is generally much easier than constructingC 2 small perturbations with the same property. On the WHAT ARE LYAPUNOV EXPONENTS, AND WHY ARE THEY INTERESTING?15 other hand, many useful dynamical properties such as uniform hyperbolicity are C 1 open. (2)C 1 generically, measurable hyperbolicity (with respect to volume) implies ergod- icity. This argument uses Pesin theory but adds some missing input needed to establish ergodicity. This input holdsC 1 generically. For example, the posi- tive entropy assumption generically implies existence of adominated splitting; this means that generically, a positive entropy diffeomorphism is something in- termediate between an Anosov diffeomorphism and a nonuniformly hyperbolic one. There is acontinuoussplittingTM=E u ⊕E s , invariant under the de- rivative, such that for almost everyx∈M, there exists ann=n(x) such that for everyξ u ∈E u (x),‖D x f n (ξ u )‖ ≥2‖ξ u ‖, and for everyξ s ∈E s (x), ‖D x f −n (ξ s )‖≥2‖ξ s ‖. The proof incorporates techniques from several earlier results, most of which have been proved in the past 20 years \[6, 18, 20, 59\]. Also playing an essential technical role in the argument is a regularization theorem of Avila: everyC 1 diffeomorphism that preserves volume can beC 1 approximated by aC 2 volume-preserving diffeomorphism \[5\]. The fact that this regularization theorem was not proved until recently highlights the difficulty in perturbing the derivative cocycle to have desired properties: you can’t changeDfwithout changingftoo (andvice versa). This is why completely general results analogous to Furstenberg’s theorem for random matrix products are few and far between for diffeomorphism cocycles. 3.Translation surfaces A flat surface is any closed surface that can be obtained by gluing together finitely many parallelograms inR 2 along coherently oriented parallel edges, as in Figure 9. Two Figure 9.A flat surface with a distinguished “South,” also known as a translation surface (courtesy Marcelo Viana). Parallel edges of the same color are identified. flat surfaces are equivalent if one can be obtained from the other by cutting, translat- ing, and rotating. Atranslationsurface is a flat surface that comes equipped with a well-defined, distinguished vertical, “North” direction (or, “South” depending on your orientation). Two translation surfaces are equivalent if one can be obtained from the other by cutting and translating (butnotrotating). 16AMIE WILKINSON Fix a translation surface Σ of genusg >0. If one picks an angleθand a pointx on Σ, and follows the corresponding straight ray through Σ, there are two possibilities: either it terminates in a corner, or it can be continued for all time. Clearly for anyθ, and almost every starting point (with respect to area), the ray will continue forever. If it continues forever, either it returns to the initial point and direction and produces a closed curve, or it continues on a parallel course without returning. A version of the Pigeonhole Principle for area (Poincar ́e recurrence) implies that for almost every point and starting direction, the line will come back arbitrarily close to the starting point. Asymptoticcycles Givenanylonggeodesicsegmentinagivendirection, “close”ittogetanelement of: PSfragreplacements Kerckhoff,Masur,Smillie:Thegeodesicflowinalmost everydirectionisuniquelyergodic. Then convergesuniformlytosome whenthelength,wheretheasymptoticcycle dependsonlyonthesurfaceandthedirection. LyapunovexponentsofTeichm ̈ullerflows–p.10/61 Figure 10.Closing up a ray that comes back close to itself (courtesy Marcelo Viana) Kerckhoff-Masur-Smillie \[42\] proved more: for a fixed Σ, and almost everyθ, the ray through any pointxis dense in Σ, and in fact is equidistributed with respect to area. Such a directionθis calleduniquely ergodic, as it is uniquely ergodic in the same sense thatf α is, for irrationalα. Suppose we start with a uniquely ergodic direction and wait for the successive times that this ray returns closer and closer to itself. This produces a sequence of closed curvesγ n which produces a sequence of cycles \[γ n \] in homology H 1 (Σ,Z)'Z 2g . Unique ergodicity of the directionθimplies that there is a uniquec 1 ∈H 1 (Σ,R) such that for any starting pointx: lim n→∞ \[γ n \] \`(γ n ) =c 1 , where\`(γ) denotes the length in Σ of the curveγ. Theorem 3.1(Forni, Avila-Viana, Zorich \[32, 13, 65, 66\]).Fix a topological surfaceS of genusg≥1, and letΣbe almost any translation surface modelled onS. 9 Then there exist real numbers1> ν 2 > ... > ν g >0and a sequence of of subspacesL 1 ⊂L 2 ⊂···L g ofH 1 (Σ,R)withdim(L k ) =ksuch that for almost everyθ, for everyx, and everyγin directionθ, the distance from\[γ\]toL g is bounded, and lim sup \`(γ)→∞ log dist(\[γ\],L i ) log(\`(γ)) =ν i+1 , for alli < g. 9 “Almost any” means with respect to the Lebesgue measure on possible choices of lengths and di- rections for the sides of the pentagon. This statement can be made more precise in terms of Lebesgue measure restricted to various strata in the moduli space of translation surfaces. WHAT ARE LYAPUNOV EXPONENTS, AND WHY ARE THEY INTERESTING?17 This theorem gives precise information about the way the direction of \[γ n \] converges to its asymptotic cyclec 1 : the convergence has a “directional nature” much in the way a vectorv∈R d converges to infinity under repeated application of a matrix A=     λ 1 ∗ ··· ∗ 0λ 2 ··· ∗ 0··· ··· ∗ 00···λ d     , withλ 1 > λ 2 >···λ d >1. t Figure 11.A local picture of the Teichm ̈uller flow (courtesy Marcelo Viana). The numbersν i are the Lyapunov exponents of theKontsevich-Zorich(KZ) cocycle over theTeichm ̈uller flow. The Teichm ̈uller flowF t acts on the moduli spaceMof translation surfaces (that is, translation surfaces modulo cutting and translation) by stretching in the East-West direction and contracting in the North-South direction. More precisely, if Σ is a translation surface, thenF t (Σ) is a new surface, obtained by transforming Σ by the linear map ( e t 0 0e −t ) . Since a stretched surface can often be reassembled to obtain a more compact one, it is plausible that the Teichm ̈uller flow has recurrent orbits (for example, periodic orbits). This is true and reflects the fact that the flowF t preserves a natural volume that assigns finite measure toM. The Kontsevich- Zorich cocycle takes values in the symplectic groupSp(2g,R) and captures homological data about the cutting and translating equivalence on the surface. Veech proved thatν 2 <1 \[60\], Forni proved thatν g >0 \[32\], and Avila-Viana proved that the numbersν 2 ,ν 3 ,...,ν g−1 are all distinct \[13\]. Zorich established the connection between exponents and the so-called deviation spectrum, which holds in greater generality \[65, 66\]. Many more things have been proved about the Lyapunov exponents of the KZ cocycle, and some of their values have been calculated which are (until recently, conjecturally) rational numbers! See \[31, 25\]. Zorich’s result reduces the proof of Theorem 3.1 to proving that the the exponents ν 1 ,...,ν g are positive and distinct. In theg= 1 case where Σ is a torus, this fact has a simple explanation. The moduli spaceMis the set of all flat structures on the torus (up to homothety), equipped with a direction. This is the quotientSL(2,R)/SL(2,Z), which is the unit tangent bundle of the modular surfaceH/SL(2,Z). The (continuous time) dynamical systemF t on Ω is given by left multiplication by the matrix ( e t 0 0e −t ) . The cocycle is, in essence, the derivative cocycle for this flow (transverse to the direction of the flow) This flow isuniformly hyperbolic(i.e. Anosov), and its exponents areν 1 = log(e) = 1 and−ν 1 = log(e −1 ) =−1. 18AMIE WILKINSON Figure 12.The moduli spaceH 2 /PSL(2,Z) of flat structures on the torus, which is a punctured sphere with two cone points, correspond- ing to the hexagonal and square lattices inR 2 . Pictured at right is a fundamental domain inH 2 . (Courtesy Carlos Matheus.) The proof for general translation surfaces that the exponentsν 1 ,...,ν g are positive and distinct is considerably more involved. We can nonetheless boil it down to some basic ideas. (1) The Teichm ̈uller flow itself is nonuniformly hyperbolic with respect to a natural volume (Veech \[60\]), and can be coded in a way that the dynamics appear almost random. (2) Cocycles over perfectly random systems (for example i.i.d. sequences of matrices) have a tendency to have distinct, nonzero Lyapunov exponents. This was first proved by Furstenberg in the 2×2 case \[34\] and later by Guivarc’h-Raugi \[36\] (see also \[35\]). (3) Cocycles over systems that are nonrandom, but sufficiently hyperbolic and with good coding, also tend to have distinct, nonzero Lyapunov exponents. This follows from series of results, beginning with Ledrappier in the 2×2 case \[46\], and in increasing generality by Bonatti-Viana \[22\], Viana \[61\], and Avila-Viana \[12\]. 4.Hofstadter’s butterfly Pictured in Figure 13 is the spectrum of the operatorH α x :\` 2 (Z)→\` 2 (Z) given by \[H α x u\](n) =u(n+ 1) +u(n−1) + 2 cos(2π(x+nα))u(n), wherexis a fixed real number called thephase, andα∈\[0,1\] is a parameter called the frequency. The vertical variable isα, and the horizontal variable is the spectral energy parameterE, which ranges in \[−4,4\]. We can read off the spectrum ofH α x by taking a horizontal slice at heightα; the black region is the spectrum. In an influential 1976 paper, Douglas Hofstadter ofG ̈odel, Escher, Bachfame dis- covered this fractal picture while modelling the behavior of electrons in a crystal lattice WHAT ARE LYAPUNOV EXPONENTS, AND WHY ARE THEY INTERESTING?19 14 ENERGY LEVELSAND %AVE FUNCTIONS OF BLQCH. . . 2241 q; henceone mightexpect theabove conditionto be satisfiedin roughly q distinct regions of the e axis (one region centeredon each root). This is indeedthe case, andis thebasis for a very striking (and atfirst disturbing) fact about this problem: when n = p/q, theBloch band always breaks up into i. -recisely q distinct energy bands. Since small variations in the magnitude of o. can produce enormous fluctuations inthevalue ofthe denominator q, oneis apparently facedwithan unacceptable physical prediction. However, nature is ingeniousenough tofind a way outof this ap- pax'ent, anomaly. Befox'e we go intothe x'esolution however, let us mentioncertainfactsabout the spectrum belonging to any valueof z. Most can be proven trivially: (i) Spectrum(tr) and spectrum (ci+N) are identical. (ii) Spectrum(n) and spec- trum(-tr) areidentical. (iii) & belongs tospec- trum(a } ifand only if -e belongs to spectrum(a}. (iv) Ifebelongs tospectrum (a) for any a, then -4 ~ &~+4. Thelast property isa littlesubtler thanthe previousthree; itcanbe proven in dif- ferent ways. One proof hasbeen published. " From properties (i) and (iv), itfollowsthata graph ofthe spectrum need only includevaluesof & between + 4 and -4, andvaluesof e in any unit interval. Weshalllook at theinterval \[0, 1\]. Fur thermore,asa consequence of pxoperties, the graph insidetheabove-defined rectangular region musthavetwoaxesof reflection, namely the hor- izontal line z= &, andthe vertical line &=0. A plot of spectrum(o. ), with nalong thevertical axis, appears in Fig. 1. (Only rational values of a with denominator less than50 areshown. ) IV. RECURSIVE STRUCTURE OFTHE GRAPH This graph has some vexy unusual properties. The large gaps form a very striking pattern some- whatresembling a butterfly; perhapsequally strik- ing are the delicacyand beauty of thefine-grained structure. These aredueto a very intricate scheme, by whichbands cluster into groups, which themselves may cluster into laxger groups, and so on.Theexact rulesofformationofthese hier- archically organizedclusteringpatterns (II's) are whatwenowwishtocover. Ourdescription of 0's willbebasedon three statements, each ofwhich describessome aspect of thestructureofthe graph. Allofthese statements arebased on ex- tremely closeexaminationofthenumexical data, andare to betaken as "empirically proven" theo- rems ofmathematics. Itwouldbe preferable to have a rigorousproof but thathassofareluded capture.Beforewe present thethree statements, let usfirst adopt some nomenclature. A "unit cell" is any portion ofthe graph located between successive integers Nand N+1 — infactwe will callthat unitcellthe N th unit cell. Every unitcell has a "local variable" P which runs from0 to 1. in particular, P isdefined to be the fractional part of rt, usually denoted as (a). AtP=O andP= I, there is one bandwhich stretches acrossthe full width of the cell,separating itfrom its upper and lower neighbors; this band is therefore called a "cell wall. " Itturns outthat eex'tain rational val- uesof I3 play a very important role inthe descrip- tion ofthe structure of a unit cell; these arethe "pure cases" FIG.1. Spectruminside aunit cell. & is the hori- zontal variable, ranging between+4 and-4, and p=(n) is the vertical vari- able, ranging from 0to 1. Figure 13.Hofstadter’s butterfly, from \[38\]. under the force of a magnetic field \[38\]. This operator plays a central role in the theory of the integer quantum Hall effect developed by Thouless et al., and, as predicted theo- retically, the butterfly has indeed appeared in von Klitzing’s QHE experiments. Similar operators are used in modeling graphene, and similar butterflies also appear in graphene related experiments (see, e.g. \[27\]). Some properties of the butterfly have been established rigorously. For example, Avila and Krikorian proved: Theorem 4.1(Avila-Krikorian, \[9\]).For every irrationalα∈\[0,1\], theα-horizontal slice of the butterfly has measure0. Their proof complements and thus extends the earlier result of Last \[45\], who proved the same statement, but for a full measure set ofαsatisfying an arithmetic condition. In particular, we have: Corollary 4.2.The butterfly has measure0. Other properties of the butterfly, for example its Hausdorff dimension, remain un- known. The connection between the spectrum of this operator and cocycles is an interesting one. Recall the definition of the spectrum ofH α x : σ(H α x ) :={E∈C:H α x −E·Idis not invertible}. The eigenvalues are thoseEso that the eigenvalue equationH α x u=Euadmits\` 2 (Z) solutions, i.e. thoseEsuch thatH α x −E·Idis not injective. The following simple observation is key. A sequence (u n :n∈Z)⊂C Z (not necessarily in\` 2 (Z)) solvesH α x u=Euif and only if A E (f n α (x)) ( u n u n−1 ) = ( u n+1 u n ) , n∈Z, 20AMIE WILKINSON wheref α :R/Z→R/Zis the translation mentioned above, and (5)A E (x) = ( E−2 cos(2πx)−1 10 ) , which defines anSL(2,R)-cocycle over the rotationf α , an example of aSchr ̈odinger cocycle. Using the cocycle notation, we have A (n) E (x) ( u 0 u −1 ) = ( u n u n−1 ) , n∈Z. Now let’s connect the properties of this cocycle with the spectrum ofH α x . Suppose for a moment that the cocycleA E overf α is uniformly hyperbolic, for some value ofE. Then for everyx∈R/Zthere is a splittingR 2 =E u (x)⊕E s (x) invariant under cocycle, with vectors inE u (x) expanded underA (mn) E (x), and vectors inE s (x) expanded under A (−mn) E (x), both by a factor of 2 m . Thus no solutionutoH α x u=Eucan be polynomially bounded simultaneously in both directions, which impliesEis not an\` 2 eigenvalue of H α x . It turns out that the converse is also true, and moreover: Theorem 4.3(R. Johnson, \[39\]).Ifαis irrational, then for everyx∈\[0,1\]: (6)σ(H α x ) ={E:A E isnotuniformly hyperbolic overf α }. For irrationalα, we denote by Σ α the spectrum ofσ(H α x ), which by Theorem 4.3 does not depend onx. Thus for irrationalα, the set Σ α is theα-horizontal slice of the butterfly. The butterfly is therefore both a dynamical picture and a spectral one. On the one hand, it depicts the spectrum of a family of operatorsH α x parametrized byα, and on the other hand, it depicts, within a 2-parameter family of cocycles{(f α ,A E ) : (E,α)∈ \[−4,4\]×\[0,1\]}, the set of parameters corresponding to dynamics that arenotuniformly hyperbolic. Returning to spectral theory, we continue to explore the relationship between spec- trum and dynamics. Ifαis irrational, thenf α is ergodic, and Oseledets’s theorem implies that the Lyapunov exponents for any cocycle overf α take constant values over a full measure set. Thus the Lyapunov exponents ofA E overf α take two essential values, χ + E ≥0, andχ − E ; the fact that det(A E ) = 1 implies thatχ − E =−χ + E ≤0. Then either A E is nonuniformly hyperbolic (ifχ + E >0), or the exponents ofA E vanish. Thus for fixedαirrational, the spectrum Σ α splits, from a dynamical point of view, into two (measurable) sets: the set ofEfor whichA E is nonununiformly hyperbolic, and the set ofEfor which the exponents ofA E vanish. On the other hand, spectral analysis gives us a different decomposition of the spectrum: σ(H α x ) =σ ac (H α x )∪σ sc (H α x )∪σ pp (H α x ) whereσ ac (H α x ) is the absolutely continuous spectrum,σ pp (H x ) is the pure point spectrum (i.e., the closure of the eigenvalues), andσ sc (H α x ) is the singular continuous spectrum. All three types of spectra have meaningful physical interpretations. While the spectrum σ(H α x ) does not depend inx(sinceαis irrational), the decomposition into subspectra can depend onx. 10 It turns out that the absolutely continuous spectrum does not depend onx, so we can write Σ ac,α for this common set. 10 In fact, the decomposition is independent of a.e.x, just not allx. WHAT ARE LYAPUNOV EXPONENTS, AND WHY ARE THEY INTERESTING?21 The next deep relation between spectral theory and Lyapunov exponents is the fol- lowing, which is due to Kotani: Theorem 4.4(Kotani, \[44\]).Fixαirrational. LetZbe the set ofEsuch that the Lyapunov exponents ofA E overf α vanish. LetZ ess denote the essential closure ofZ, i.e. the closure of the Lebesgue density points ofZ. Then Σ ac = Z ess . Thus Lyapunov exponents of the cocycle are closely related to the spectral type of the operatorsH x . For instance, Theorem 4.4 implies that ifA E is nonuniformly hyperbolic overf α for almost everyE∈Σ α , then Σ ac,α is empty:H α x has no absolutely continuous spectrum. We remark that Theorems 4.3 and 4.4 hold for much broader classes of Schr ̈odinger operators over ergodic measure preserving systems. For a short and self-contained proof of Theorem 4.3, see \[64\]. The spectral theory of one-dimensional Schr ̈odinger operators is a rich subject, and we’ve only scratched the surface here; for further reading, see the recent surveys \[40\] and \[26\]. Avila’s very recent work, some of it still unpublished, provides further fascinating connections of this type, linking the spectral properties of quasiperiodic operators with analytic potentials to properties of the Lyapunov exponents of their associated cycles \[3, 4\]. 5.Spaces of dynamical systems and metadynamics Sections 2, 3 and 4 are all aboutfamiliesof dynamical systems. In Section 2, the family is the space of all volume preserving diffeomorphisms of a compact manifoldM. This is an infinite dimensional, non-locally compact space, and we have thrown up our hands and depicted it in Figure 8 as a blob. Theorem 2.2 asserts that within a residual set of positive entropy systems (which turn out to be an open subset of the blob), measurable hyperbolicity (and ergodicity) is generic. In Section 3, the moduli spaceMof translation surfaces can also be viewed as a space of dynamical systems, in particular thebilliardflows onrationalpolygons, i.e., polygons whose corner angles are multiples of 2π. In a billiard system, one shoots a ball in a fixed direction and records the location of the bounces on the walls. By a process called unfolding, a billiard trajectory can be turned into a straight ray in a translation surface. 11 The process is illustrated in Figure 14 for the square torus billiard. The moduli spaceMis not so easy to draw and not completely understood (except forg= 1). It is, however, a finite dimensional manifold and carries some nice structures, which makes it easier to picture than Diff(M). Theorem 3.1 illustrates how dynamical properties of ameta dynamical system, i.e. the Teichm ̈uller flowF t :M→M, are tied to the dynamical properties of the elements ofM. For example, the Lyapunov exponents of the KZ cocycle overF t for a given billiard table with a given direction describe how well an infinite billiard ray can be approximated by closed, nearby billiard paths. In Section 4, we saw how the spectral properties of a family of operators{H α x : α∈\[0,1\]}are reflected in the dynamical properties of families of cocycles{(f α ,A E ) : 11 Not every translation surface comes from a billiard, since the billiards have extra symmetries. But the space of billiards embeds inside the space of translation surfaces, and the Teichm ̈uller flow preserves the set of billiards. 22AMIE WILKINSON Figure 14.Unfolding billiards in a square to get lines in a torus (cour- tesy Diana Davis). (E,α)∈\[−4,4\]×\[0,1\]}. Theorems about spectral properties thus have their dynamical counterparts. For example, Theorem 4.3 tells us that the butterfly is the complement of those parameter values where the cocycle (f α ,A E ) is uniformly hyperbolic. Since uniform hyperbolicity is an open property in bothαandE, the complement of the butterfly is open. Corollary 4.2 tells us that the butterfly has measure 0. Thus the set of parameter values in the square that are hyperbolic form an open and dense, full-measure subset. In fact, work of Bourgain-Jitomirskaya \[24\] implies thatthe butterfly is precisely the set of parameter values(E,α)where the Lyapunov exponents of(f α ,A E )vanish for somex. 12 These results in some ways echo Theorem 2.2, within a very special family of dynamics. The Hofstadter butterfly is just one instance of a low-dimensional family of dynamical systems containing interesting dynamics and rich structure. A similar picture appears in complex dynamics, 13 in the 1 (complex) parameter family of dynamical systems{p c (z) = z 2 +c:c∈C}. The Mandelbrot set consists of parameterscfor which the mapp c has a connected Julia setJ c : Figure 15.The Mandelbrot Set 12 which automatically means for allxin case of irrationalα. 13 Another field in which Avila has made significant contributions, which we do not touch upon here. WHAT ARE LYAPUNOV EXPONENTS, AND WHY ARE THEY INTERESTING?23 Note that in this conformal context, uniform hyperbolicity of the derivative cocycle ofp c onJ c just means that there exists annsuch that|(p n c (z)) ′ | ≥2, for allz∈J c . It is conjectured that the set of parameterscsuch thatp c is uniformly hyperbolic onJ c is (open and) dense in the Mandelbrot set. 6.Themes We conclude by summarizing a few themes, some of which have come up in our discussion. Nonvanishing exponents sometimes produce chaotic behavior.The bedrock result in this regard is Anosov’s proof \[1\] that smooth Anosov flows and diffeomorph- isms are mixing (and in particular ergodic). Another notable result is Anatole Katok’s proof \[41\] that measurable hyperbolicity of diffeomorphism with respect to some mea- sureμproduces many periodic orbits — in particular, the number of orbits of periodn grows exponentially inn. Pesin theory provides a sophisticated tool for exploiting mea- suable hyperbolicity to produce chaotic behavior such as mixing and even the Bernoulli property. Exponents can carry geometric information.We have not discussed it here, but there are delicate relationships between entropy, exponents and Hausdorff dimension of invariant sets and measures, established in full generality by Ledrappier-Young \[47, 48\]. The expository article \[63\] contains a clear discussion of these relationships as well as some of the other themes discussed in this paper. The interplay between dimension, entropy and exponents has been fruitfully exploited in numerous contexts, notably in rigidity theory. Some examples are: Ratner’s theorem for unipotent flows, Elon Linden- strauss’s proof of Quantum Unique Ergodicity for arithmetic surfaces, and the Einsiedler- Katok-Lindenstrauss proof that the set of exceptions to the Littlewood conjecture has Hausdorff dimension 0. See \[53, 49, 30\]. Vanishing exponents sometimes present an exceptional situation that can be exploited.Both Furstenberg’s theorem and Kotani theory illustrate this phenomenon. Here’s Furstenberg’s criterion, presented in a special case: Theorem 6.1(Furstenberg, \[34\]).Let(A 1 ,...,A k )⊂SL(2,R), and letGbe the small- est closed subgroup ofSL(2,R)containing{A 1 ,...,A k }. Assume that: (1)Gis not compact. (2)There is no finite collection of lines∅ 6=L⊂R 2 such thatM(L) =L, for all M∈G. Then for any probability vectorp= (p 1 ,...p k )on{1,...,k}withp i >0, for alli, there existsχ + (p)>0, such that for almost everyω∈ {1,...,k} N (with respect to the Bernoulli measurep N ): lim n→∞ 1 n log‖A (n) (ω)‖=χ + . One way to view this result: if the exponentχ + vanishes, then the matrices either leave invariant a common line or pair of lines, or they generate a precompact group. Both possibilities are degenerate and are easily destroyed by perturbing the matrices. One proof of a generalization of this result \[46\] exploits the connections between entropy, 24AMIE WILKINSON dimension and exponents alluded to before. This result was formulated more completely in a dynamical setting by \[21\] as an “Invariance Principle,” which has been further refined and applied in various works of Avila and others. See for example \[14, 10, 15\]. For generalSL(d,R) cocycles, vanishing of exponents is still an exceptional situation, but even more generally, the conditiond i ≥2 — that an exponent has multiplicity greater than 1 — is also exceptional. This statement was rigorously established for random matrix products by Guivarc’h-Raugi \[36\] and undleries the Avila-Viana proof of simplicity of spectrum for the KZ cocycle. See the discussion at the end of Section 3. The same ideas play a role in Margulis’s proof of superrigidity for higher rank lattices in semisimple Lie groups. See \[52\]. Continuity and regularity of exponents is a tricky business.In general, Lya- punov exponents do not depend smoothly, or even continuously, on the cocycle. Un- derstanding the exact relationship between exponents, cocycles, measures and dynamics is an area still under exploration, and a few of Avila’s deepest results, some of them still in preparation with Eskin and Viana, lie in this area. The book \[62\] is an excellent introduction to the subject. Acknowledgments.Effusive thanks to Artur Avila, Svetlana Jitomirskaya, Curtis McMullen, Zhenghe Zhang, and Anton Zorich for patiently explaining a lot of math to me, to Clark Butler, Kathryn Lindsay, Kiho Park, Jinxin Xue and Yun Yang for catching many errors, and to Diana Davis, Carlos Matheus, Curtis McMullen and Marcelo Viana for generously sharing their images. I am also indebted to Bryna Kra for carefully reading a draft of this paper and suggesting numerous improvements. References \[1\] D. Anosov, Geodesic flows on closed Riemannian manifolds of negative curvature.Trudy Mat. Inst. Steklov.90(1967). \[2\] Arnold, V. I.; Avez, A.,Ergodic problems of classical mechanics.Translated from the French by A. Avez. W. A. Benjamin, Inc., New York-Amsterdam 1968. \[3\] A. Avila, Global theory of one-frequency Schr ̈odinger operators,Acta Math.215(2015), 1–54. \[4\] A. Avila. KAM, Lyapunov exponents and spectral dichotomy for one-frequency Schr ̈odinger operators. In preparation. \[5\] A. Avila, On the regularization of conservative maps.Acta Math.205(2010), 5–18. \[6\] A. Avila, J. Bochi, Nonuniform hyperbolicity, global dominated splittings and generic prop- erties of volume-preserving diffeomorphisms.Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.364(2012), no. 6, 2883–2907. \[7\] A. Avila, S. Crovisier, A. Wilkinson, Diffeomorphisms with positive metric entropy, preprint. \[8\] A. Avila, S. Jitomirskaya, The Ten Martini Problem,Ann. Math.170(2009), 303–342. \[9\] A. Avila, R. Krikorian, Reducibility or non-uniform hyperbolicity for quasiperiodic Schr ̈odinger cocycles.Ann. Math.164(2006), 911-940. \[10\] A. Avila, J, Santamaria, Jimmy, M. Viana, Holonomy invariance: rough regularity and appli- cations to Lyapunov exponents.Ast ́erisque358(2013), 13-74. \[11\] A. Avila, J. Santamaria, M. Viana, A. Wilkinson, Cocycles over partially hyperbolic maps. Ast ́erisque358(2013), 1-12. \[12\] A. Avila, M. Viana, Simplicity of Lyapunov spectra: a sufficient criterion.Port. Math.64 (2007), 311-376. \[13\] A. Avila, M. Viana, Simplicity of Lyapunov spectra: proof of the Zorich-Kontsevich conjecture. Acta Math.198(2007), no. 1, 1-56. \[14\] A. Avila, M. Viana, Extremal Lyapunov exponents: an invariance principle and applications. Invent. Math.181(2010), no. 1, 115-189. WHAT ARE LYAPUNOV EXPONENTS, AND WHY ARE THEY INTERESTING?25 \[15\] A. Avila, M. Viana, A. Wilkinson, Absolute continuity, Lyapunov exponents and rigidity I: geodesic flows.J. Eur. Math. Soc.17(2015), 1435-1462. \[16\] I. B ́ar ́any, A. F. Beardon, T. K. Carne, Barycentric subdivision of triangles and semigroups of M ̈obius maps,Mathematika43(1996), 165–171. \[17\] J. Bochi, Genericity of zero Lyapunov exponents.Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems22(2002), no. 6, 1667–1696. \[18\] J. Bochi,C 1 -generic symplectic diffeomorphisms: partial hyperbolicity and zero centre Lya- punov exponents.J. Inst. Math. Jussieu9(2010), no. 1, 49–93. \[19\] J. Bochi, M. Viana, Lyapunov exponents: how frequently are dynamical systems hyperbolic? Modern dynamical systems and applications271–297, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2004. \[20\] J. Bochi, M. Viana, The Lyapunov exponents of generic volume-preserving and symplectic maps.Ann. Math.161(2005), no. 3, 1423–1485. \[21\] C. Bonatti, X. G ́omez-Mont, M. Viana, G ́en ́ericit ́e d’exposants de Lyapunov non-nuls pour des produits d ́eterministes de matrices.Ann. Inst. H. Poincar ́e Anal. Non Lin ́eaire20(2003), no. 4, 579–624. \[22\] C. Bonatti and M. Viana. Lyapunov exponents with multiplicity 1 for deterministic products of matrices.Ergod. Th. & Dynam. Sys, 24:1295–1330, 2004. \[23\] J. Bourgain and M. Goldstein, On nonperturbative localization with quasi-periodic potential, Ann. Math.152(2000), 835–879. \[24\] J. Bourgain, S. Jitomirskaya, Continuity of the Lyapunov exponent for quasiperiodic operators with analytic potential.J. Statist. Phys.108(2002), 1203–1218. \[25\] J. Chaika, A. Eskin, Every flat surface is Birkhoff and Oseledets generic in almost every direction.J. Mod. Dyn.9(2015), 1–23. \[26\] D. Damanik, Schr ̈odinger operators with dynamically defined potentials: a survey, to appear: Erg. Th. Dyn. Syst. \[27\] C. Dean, L. Wang, P. Maher, C. Forsythe, F. Ghahari, Y. Gao, J. Katoch, M. Ishigami, P. Moon, M. Koshino, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, K. L. Shepard, J. Hone, P. Kim, Hofstadter’s butterfly and the fractal quantum Hall effect in moir ́e superlatticesNature497(2013), 598– 602. \[28\] D. Dolgopyat, H. Hu, Y. Pesin, An example of a smooth hyperbolic measure with countably many ergodic componentsProceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics69(2001) 95–106. \[29\] D. Dolgopyat, Y. Pesin, Every compact manifold carries a completely hyperbolic diffeomor- phism.Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems22(2002), 409–435. \[30\] M. Einsiedler, A. Katok, E. Lindenstrauss, Invariant measures and the set of exceptions to Littlewood’s conjecture.Ann. Math.(2)164(2006), 513–560. \[31\] A. Eskin, M. Kontsevich, A. Zorich, Sum of Lyapunov exponents of the Hodge bundle with respect to the Teichm ̈uller geodesic flow.Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes ́ Etudes Sci.120(2014), 207–333. \[32\] G. Forni, Deviation of ergodic averages for area-preserving flows on surfaces of higher genus. Ann. Math.155(2002), 1–103. \[33\] H. Furstenberg, H. Kesten, Products of random matrices.Ann. Math. Statist.31(1960) 457– 469. \[34\] H. Furstenberg, Noncommuting random products.Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.108(1963) 377– 428. \[35\] I. Goldshe ̆ id, G. Margulis, Lyapunov exponents of a product of random matrices. (Russian) Uspekhi Mat. Nauk 44(1989), no. 5(269), 13–60; translation in Russian Math. Surveys 44 (1989), no. 5, 11–71. \[36\] Y. Guivarc’h, A. Raugi, Propri ́et ́es de contraction d’un semi-groupe de matrices inversibles. Coefficients de Liapunoff d’un produit de matrices al ́eatoires ind ́ependantes.Israel J. Math. 65(1989), no. 2, 165–196. \[37\] H. Helson, Harmonic analysis. Second edition. Texts and Readings in Mathematics,7. Hin- dustan Book Agency, New Delhi, 2010. \[38\] D. Hofstadter, Energy levels and wavefunctions of Bloch electrons in rational and irrational magnetic fields.Physical Review B14(1976) 2239–2249. 26AMIE WILKINSON \[39\] R. Johnson, Exponential dichotomy, rotation number, and linear differential operators with bounded coefficients,J. Differential Equations61(1986), 54–78. \[40\] S. Jitomirskaya, C. A. Marx, Dynamics and spectral theory of quasi-periodic Schr ̈odinger-type operators, to appear:Erg. Th. Dyn. Syst. \[41\] A. Katok, Lyapunov exponents, entropy and periodic orbits for diffeomorphisms.Inst. Hautes ́ Etudes Sci. Publ. Math.51(1980), 137–173. \[42\] S. Kerckhoff, H. Masur, J. Smillie, Ergodicity of billiard flows and quadratic differentials.Ann. Math.124(1986), 293–311. \[43\] A. Kolmogorov, Th ́eorie g ́en ́erale des syst\`emes dynamiques et m ́ecanique classique.Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians(Amsterdam 1954) Vol. 1, 315–333 \[44\] S. Kotani, Ljapunov indices determine absolutely continuous spectra of stationary random one-dimensional Schr ̈odinger operators,Stochastic Analysis(Katata/Kyoto, 1982), (North- Holland Math. Library 32, North-Holland, Amsterdam)(1984), 225–247. \[45\] Y. Last, Zero measure spectrum for the almost Mathieu operator,Comm. Math Phys.164, 421-432 (1994). \[46\] F. Ledrappier. Positivity of the exponent for stationary sequences of matrices. InLyapunov exponents (Bremen, 1984), volume 1186 ofLect. Notes Math., pages 56–73. Springer-Verlag, 1986. \[47\] F. Ledrappier, L.S. Young, The metric entropy of diffeomorphisms. I. Characterization of measures satisfying Pesin’s entropy formula.Ann. Math.122(1985), 509–539. \[48\] F. Ledrappier, L.S. Young, The Metric Entropy of Diffeomorphisms. II. Relations between Entropy, Exponents and Dimension.Ann. Math.122(1985), 540–574. \[49\] E. Lindenstrauss, Invariant measures and arithmetic quantum unique ergodicity.Ann. Math. 163(2006), 165–219. \[50\] R. Ma ̃n ́e, Ergodic theory and differentiable dynamics.Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer GrenzgebieteSpringer-Verlag, Berlin, 1987. \[51\] R. Ma ̃n ́e, Oseledets’s theorem from the generic viewpoint.Proc. Int. Congress of Mathemati- cians(Warszawa 1983) Vol. 2, 1259–76. \[52\] G. A. Margulis,Discrete subgroups of semisimple Lie groups.Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete17. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1991. \[53\] D. W. Morris,Ratner’s theorems on unipotent flows.Chicago Lectures in Mathematics. Uni- versity of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 2005. \[54\] C. McMullen, Barycentric subdivision, martingales and hyperbolic geometry, preprint, 2011. \[55\] V. I. Oseledets, A multiplicative ergodic theorem. Characteristic Ljapunov, exponents of dy- namical systems. (Russian)Trudy Moskov. Mat. Ob ̆s ̆c.19(1968) 179-210. \[56\] J. Oxtoby, S. Ulam, Measure-preserving homeomorphisms and metrical transitivity.Ann. Math.(2)42(1941), 874–920. \[57\] Y. Pesin, Characteristic Ljapunov exponents, and smooth ergodic theory.Uspehi Mat. Nauk 32(1977), no. 4 (196), 55–112, 287. \[58\] M.A. Rodriguez-Hertz, Genericity of nonuniform hyperbolicity in dimension 3.J. Mod. Dyn. 6(2012), no. 1, 121–138. \[59\] M. Shub, A. Wilkinson, Pathological foliations and removable zero exponents.Invent. Math. 139(2000), no. 3, 495–508. \[60\] W. A. Veech, The Teichm ̈uller geodesic flow,Ann. Math.124(1986), 441530. \[61\] M. Viana. Almost all cocycles over any hyperbolic system have nonvanishing Lyapunov expo- nents.Ann. Math.,167(2008) 643–680. \[62\] M. Viana,Lectures on Lyapunov exponents.Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics, 145. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2014. \[63\] L.-S. Young, Ergodic theory of differentiable dynamical systems.Real and complex dynamical systems, 293–336, NATO Adv. Sci. Inst. Ser. C Math. Phys. Sci., 464, Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 1995. \[64\] Z.Zhang,ResolventsetofSchr ̈odingeroperatorsanduniformhyperbolicity, arXiv:1305.4226v2(2013). WHAT ARE LYAPUNOV EXPONENTS, AND WHY ARE THEY INTERESTING?27 \[65\] A. Zorich,How do the leaves of a closed 1-form wind around a surface, “Pseudoperiodic Topology”, V. Arnold, M. Kontsevich, A. Zorich (eds.), Translations of the AMS, Ser.2, vol. 197, AMS, Providence, RI (1999), 135–178. \[66\] A. Zorich,Asymptotic Flag of an Orientable Measured Foliation on a Surface, in “Geometric Study of Foliations”, World Scientific Pb. Co., (1994), 479–498.
