arXiv:1502.06554v2 \[math.DS\] 7 Dec 2015 A VOLUME-BASED APPROACH TO THE MULTIPLICATIVE ERGODIC THEOREM ON BANACH SPACES ALEX BLUMENTHAL Abstract.A volume growth-based proof of the Multiplicative Ergodic Theorem for Banach spaces is presented, following the approach of Ruelle for cocyclesacting on a Hilbert space. As a conse- quence, we obtain a volume growth interpretation for the Lyapunov exponents of a Banach space cocycle. 1.Introduction and Statement of Results 1.1.Introduction.The purpose of this paper is to present a volume-based proof of the Multi- plicative Ergodic Theorem (MET) for cocycles on a Banach space, from which a volume growth rate interpretation of Lyapunov exponents for such cocycles will be readily apparent. By now, there are many proofs of the MET for cocycles on finite dimensional vector spaces, e.g., \[18, 20, 21, 28\]; for additional treatments, see Section 3.4of \[2\] orВ§1.5 of \[15\]. For applications, par- ticularly for the purposes of smooth ergodic theory, the most successful interpretation of Lyapunov exponents is that of volume growth: the exponential growth rate of theq-dimensional volume of a вҖҳgenericвҖҷq-dimensional subspace is the sum of the firstqLyapunov exponents. The volume growth interpretation for the Lyapunov exponents for cocycles of operators on finite dimensional spaces is implicit in RuelleвҖҷs proof of the MET \[21\]: theq-th Lyapunov exponent is defined as the exponential growth rate of theq-th singular value of high iterates of the cocycle, and it is shown that the вҖҳslowвҖҷ growing singular value decomposition subspaces for high iterates of the cocycle converge at an exponentially fast rate to the subspaces of вҖҳslowвҖҷ growing vectors for the cocycle. The very same approach is used to prove the MET for compact cocycles on Hilbert spaces in \[22\], and the volume growth interpretation is the same, since the finite dimensional subspaces of a Hilbert space carry notions of volume and determinant inherited from the inner product on the ambient Hilbert space. For cocycles on Banach spaces, the MET was originally provedby Ma Мғn МҒe for compact, injective cocycles satisfying a certain continuity condition \[17\]. Thieullen extended Ma Мғn МҒeвҖҷs result to include injective cocycles satisfying a quasicompactness condition \[27\], and Lian and Lu proved a version of the MET for injective cocycles on separable Banach spaces satisfying only a measurability condition \[16\]. The method in these papers is to show that the вҖҳfastвҖҷ growing subspaces (that is, subspaces of vectors achieving a sufficient rate of exponential contraction in backwards time) are almost surely finite dimensional. Then, Lyapunov exponents are defined to be the exponential rates at which the dimension of the вҖҳfastвҖҷ growing subspaces has a jump discontinuity, and it is shown that the вҖҳslowвҖҷ growing subspaces are the graphs of mappings given bya certain convergent infinite series of graphing maps. Thieullen also considered non-injective cocycles \[27\], and deduced from the MET for injective cocycles that even when the cocycles arenвҖҷt injective, the вҖҳslowвҖҷ growing subspaces are finite- codimensional and vary measurably, and the only possible growth rates of vectors are Lyapunov exponents; this result is referred to as the One-Sided MET, and holds even when the base dynam- ics are noninvertible. ThieullenвҖҷs proof in \[27\] involves passing to an injective вҖҳnatural extensionвҖҷ 1991Mathematics Subject Classification.Primary: 37H15, Secondary: 37L30. Key words and phrases.Banach space, Lyapunov exponents, Gelfand numbers. 1 2ALEX BLUMENTHAL cocycle over an augmented Banach space. Doan, in his PhD thesis \[25\], carried out an analogous deduction for strongly measurable cocycles on a separable Banach space, assuming the MET in \[16\]. Quas, Froyland and Lloyd \[9\] deduced from the One-Sided MET in \[27\] that even when the cocycle is not injective, there is still an invariant, measurably-varying distribution of вҖҳfastвҖҷ growing subspaces, as long as the base dynamics are invertible. Quasand Gonz МҒalez-Tokman \[10\] also deduced the existence of an invariant distribution of вҖҳfastвҖҷ-growing subspaces for cocycles on a separable Banach space satisfying the measurability condition in \[16\], assuming the One-Sided MET in \[25\]. In all known proofs of the Banach space MET, genuine finite-dimensional volumes (with multi- plicative determinants) are not used, and there is no apparent volume growth interpretation of the Lyapunov exponents. So, it is natural to ask whether there can be a volume growth interpretation for Lyapunov exponents of cocyles acting on a Banach space, noting that there is no trouble as- signing volumes to the finite dimensional subspaces of a Banach space, using Haar measure, and that one can define determinants as volume ratios taken usingthese volumes. Indeed, once the MET is proven by other means, it is possible to show that Lyapunov exponents have the very same volume growth interpretation as in the Hilbert space case. In light of RuelleвҖҷs approach to the MET in \[21, 22\], though, this order of actionsis strange: volume growth is used to prove the MET, and the volume growth interpretation of the Lyapunov exponents follows naturally. The purpose of the present paper is to show how to deduce the Banach space MET using volume growth ideas, using arguments analogous to those in \[22\], from which the volume growth rate interpretation of Lyapunov exponents will be easily seen. The proof we present treats non-injective cocycles with no added effort, and yields immediately that vectors sufficiently inclined away from вҖҳslowвҖҷ growing subspaces grow uniformly quickly. After the work in the present manuscript was completed, the author was made aware of the similar work of A. Quas and C. Gonzalez-Tokman \[11\]. The present workwas carried out simultaneously with and independently of \[11\]. We note that there are several technical differences between the precise statement of the MET in \[11\] and that given in the present paper. For the rest of this section, we will define and describe the volumes on finite dimensional subspaces that we use, state assumptions on the cocycles we will study,and state the MET. In Section 2, we will give preliminaries on the geometry of Banach spaces and the volumes on finite dimensional subspaces necessary for the proof, which will be given in Section 3. 1.2.Statement of Results.We now state our results precisely, beginning with an overview of volumes on finite dimensional subspaces of a Banach space. 1.2.1.Volumes and Determinants on Finite Dimensional Subspaces.We let (B,|В·|) be an infinite dimensional Banach space, and letEвҠӮ Bbe a a finite dimensional subspace. TreatingEas a topological group with the group action given by addition of vectors, there exists a nonzero, translation invariant measure onE, unique up to a scalar factor: the Haar measure onE(В§2.2 of \[8\]). In the definition of volumes given below, we normalize the Haar measure onEby assigning a particular volume to the|В·|- unit ball ofE. Definition 1.1.LetqвҲҲNand letEвҠӮ Bbe aq-dimensional subspace. We define theinduced volumem E onEto be the unique Haar measure onEfor which m E {eвҲҲE:|e|вүӨ1}=Пү q , whereПү q is theq-dimensional volume of the Euclidean unit ball inR q . Many identities involving volume on inner product spaces can be recovered for the induced volume as inequalities, with uniform bounds depending onlyon the dimensionqof the subspace. A VOLUME-BASED APPROACH TO THE MULTIPLICATIVE ERGODIC THEOREM ON BANACH SPACES 3 The following is a prototypical example, and demonstrates that the induced volume really does вҖҳseeвҖҷ the geometry on finite dimensional subspaces. Lemma 1.2.IfEвҠӮBhas dimensionq <вҲһ, then for anyv 1 ,В·В·В·, v q вҲҲE, we have m E P\[v 1 ,В·В·В·, v q \]вүҲ|v q |В· qвҲ’1 вҲҸ i=1 d(v i ,hv j :i < jвүӨqi), whereP\[v 1 ,В·В·В·, v q \] ={c 1 v 1 +В·В·В·+c q v q : 0вүӨc i вүӨ1,1вүӨiвүӨq}is the parallelepiped spanned by v 1 ,В·В·В·, v q . For vectorsw 1 ,В·В·В·, w q вҲҲ B, we denote byhw 1 ,В·В·В·, w k ithe subspace ofBspanned by the vectorsw 1 ,В·В·В·, w q . The symbolвүҲdenotes equality up to a multiplicative constant depending only onq. Using the tools developed in Section 2, the proof of Lemma 1.2is straightforward, and is sketched in Remark 2.16. With these volumes in place, the determinant is defined as a volume ratio: for a bounded linear mapA:B вҶ’Band a finite dimensional subspaceEвҠӮB, we write (1.1)det(A|E) = { m AE AO m E O Ainjective onE, 0otherwise, whereOis any Borel subset ofEwith nonzerom E -volume. By the uniqueness of Haar measure, the right-hand side of (1.1) does not depend on the setO вҠӮE. Define the maximalq-dimensional volume growth (1.2)V q (A) = sup{det(A|E) :EвҠӮB,dimE=q} for bounded, linear mapsA:B вҶ’B, and observe that since the determinant is multiplicative,being a Radon-Nikodym derivative,V q is submultiplicative, i.e., for bounded linear mapsA, B:B вҶ’ B, we haveV q (AB)вүӨV q (A)V q (B). 1.2.2.Statement of the MET.Let (X,F, Ој) be a probability space, and letfbe a measure pre- serving transformation on (X,F, Ој). Throughout the paper, we assume for simplicity thatОјis ergodic; the only real difference in the nonergodic case is that the Lyapunov exponents and their multiplicities may now depend on the point in the base space,but this complication does not change the underlying arguments in any substantive way. A cocycle is a mapT:XвҶ’L(B), whereL(B) is the space of bounded linear operators onB, subject to the following measurability assumption. There is a sequence of finite-valued mapsT (n) :XвҶ’L(B) such that for anyxвҲҲX,T (n) x вҶ’T x inL(B) in the induced operator norm asnвҶ’вҲһ. (1.3) We writeT x , T (n) x forT, T (n) evaluated atxвҲҲX, respectively. The condition (1.3) is calleduniform measurability(Definition 3.5.5 in \[12\]). We writeT n x =T f nвҲ’1 x в—ҰВ·В·В·в—ҰT x , and forО»вҲҲR, we define the subspaces F О» (x) ={vвҲҲB: lim sup nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log|T n x v|вүӨО»},(1.4) using the convention log 0 =вҲ’вҲһ. ForAвҲҲL(B), we denote by|A| Оұ the measure of noncompactness ofA, which will be defined precisely in Definition 2.8. We now state the main result of this paper, a version of the METemphasizing the volume growth interpretation of the Lyapunov exponents of a Banach space cocycle. Note that we do not assume thatT x is an injective operator. 4ALEX BLUMENTHAL Theorem 1.3.LetT:XвҶ’L(B)satisfy(1.3), and assume moreover that вҲ« X log + |T x |dОј(x)<вҲһ. Then, there is aОј-full,f-invariant setО“вҠӮXwith the following properties. (1) ForxвҲҲО“, theq-dimensional growth rates l q = lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n logV q (T n x ) exist and are constant overО“. Similarly,l Оұ = lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log|T n x | Оұ exists and is constant overО“. (2) Defining the sequence{K q } qвүҘ1 byK 1 =l 1 andK q =l q вҲ’l qвҲ’1 forq >1, we have that K 1 вүҘK 2 вүҘ В·В·В·, and thatK q вҶ’l Оұ asqвҶ’ вҲһ. We denote byО» i the distinct values of the sequence{K q } q with finite multiplicitiesm i ; in particular, for anyl > l Оұ , we have that вҲ‘ i:О» i вүҘl m i <+вҲһ. The Lyapunov exponentsО» i satisfy the following. (a) For any Lyapunov exponentО» i , we have thatcodimF О» i (x) =m 1 +m 2 +В·В·В·+m iвҲ’1 . (b) For any subsequent pair of Lyapunov exponentsО» i > О» i+1 вүҘl Оұ and for anyxвҲҲО“, vвҲҲF О» i (x)\\F О» i+1 (x), lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log|T n x v|=О» i . (c) (Volume Growth) For anyxвҲҲО“, any Lyapunov exponentО» i , and any complementE toF О» i (x), we have that lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log det(T n x |E) =m 1 О» 1 +В·В·В·+m i О» i .(1.5) (3) The mappingx7вҶ’F О» i (x)is measurable. Remark 1.4.The measurability assumption on the cocycle in \[17, 27\] is calledОј-continuity, and is stronger than (1.3):Ој-continuity requires the base spaceXto be a compact topological space with BorelПғ-algebraF, the base mapfto be continuous, and the existence of a sequence of disjoint compact sets{K n } n inXwithОј(вҲӘ n K n ) = 1 for whichT| K n is norm continuousK n вҶ’L(B). In \[16\], the Banach spaceBis assumed separable, and the measurability condition in that paper isstrong measurability, which requires that the evaluation mapsx7вҶ’T x vforvвҲҲBbe measurable as maps (X,F)вҶ’(B,Bor(B)) (Definition 3.5.4 in \[12\]), where Bor(B) refers to the Borel sigma- algebra for the norm topology onB; the same measurability hypothesis is used in \[11\]. The condition (1.3) implies strong measurability (see Corollary 1 to Theorem 3.5.3 in \[12\]). Remark 1.5.Item (3) in Theorem 1.3 is formulated precisely and proved inthe Appendix as Lemma 3.11. We note that this measurability is entirely independent of the arguments proving items (1), (2); however, we include it for the sake of completeness. 1.3.Notation.We collect here the various notations used in the paper. (1) We denote by (X,F, Ој, f) an ergodic m.p.t.; we do not assume thatfis invertible. (2) Fora, bвҲҲR,aвҲЁb= max{a, b}. (3) LetqвҲҲN. Fora, bвҲҲ\[0,вҲһ), we will writea.bwhenaвүӨC q b, andaвүҲbifa.band b.a. It will be clear from context which constant.,вүҲdepend on. (4) For normed vector spacesV 1 , V 2 , we denote byL(V 1 , V 2 ) the space of bounded linear oper- atorsV 1 вҶ’V 2 . (5)Bwill always refer to an infinite dimensional Banach space with norm|В·|, and we always refer to the induced operator norm onL(B) :=L(B,B) by the same symbol|В·|. (6) For a subspaceEвҠӮ B, we letB E :={vвҲҲE:|v| вүӨ1}denote the closed unit ball and S E :={vвҲҲE:|v|= 1}denote the unit sphere. A VOLUME-BASED APPROACH TO THE MULTIPLICATIVE ERGODIC THEOREM ON BANACH SPACES 5 (7) For vectorsv 1 ,В·В·В·, v m вҲҲ B, we denote byhv i : 1вүӨiвүӨmiorhv 1 ,В·В·В·, v m ithe sub- space ofBspanned byv 1 ,В·В·В·, v m . We denote the parallelepiped spanned byv 1 ,В·В·В·, v m by P\[v 1 ,В·В·В·, v m \] ={c 1 v 1 +В·В·В·+c m v m :c i вҲҲ\[0,1\]}. (8) LetAвҲҲL(B) and letEвҠӮBbe a subspace. We denote byA| E вҲҲL(E,B) the restriction of AtoE. (9) When dimE <вҲһ, we denote by det(A|E) the determinant ofAonE, as defined in (1.1). (10) For a subspaceFвҠӮB, we denote byF в—Ұ the annihilator ofFinB вҲ— , i.e., F в—Ұ :={lвҲҲB вҲ— :l(f) = 0 for allfвҲҲF}. The codimension of a closed subspaceFвҠӮBis defined by codimF= dimF в—Ұ . (11) For a vector spaceV, we writeV=EвҠ•FwhenVis the direct sum ofEandF, i.e., each vector inVcan be written as the unique sum of an element ofEand an element ofF, and we call such a splitting ofVanalgebraic splitting; we writeПҖ E//F for the projection operator ontoEparallel toF. (12) WhenVis a normed vector space,V=EвҠ•Fis an algebraic splitting, andПҖ E//F is a bounded linear operator, we callV=EвҠ•Fatopological splitting. For a closed subspace EвҠӮB, ifFвҠӮBis a closed subspace for whichB=EвҠ•Fis a topological splitting, we call Fatopological complementtoE. (13)G(B) refers to the Grassmanian of closed subspaces ofB, andG q (B),G q (B) refer to the subsets ofq-dimensional andq-codimensional subspaces ofB, respectively.d H refers to the Hausdorff distance onG(B), defined in (2.2). (14) ForAвҲҲL(B) andqвҲҲN,c q (A) denotes theq-th Gelfand number ofA, defined in (2.17), and c(A) is defined as the limit lim qвҶ’вҲһ c q (A). We denote by|A| Оұ the measure of compactness ofA, as in Definition 2.8. 2.Induced Volumes and Banach Space Geometry In this section, we collect some results on the geometry of Banach spaces and discuss the geo- metric properties of the induced volumes defined in Section 1. For our purposes, there are two echelons for the geometry forBanach spaces: the вҖҳlocalвҖҷ geometry of finite dimensional subspaces and the induced volumes on them, and the вҖҳglobalвҖҷ geometry of the Banach space at large. 2.1.Global Geometry of Banach Spaces.We begin by defining a concept of вҖҳangleвҖҷ in Banach space, and showing its relation to the projection maps associated to splittings. Next, we recall some facts about the geometry of the Grassmanian of closed subspaces ofB. Finally, we recall the definition and some basic properties of the measure of noncompactness|В·| Оұ . 2.1.1.Angles, Splittings and Complements.Key to volume-growth based approaches to the MET is a concept of angle between vectors and subspaces. The following notion of angle is well-suited to our purposes. Definition 2.1 is adapted from Section II of Ma Мғn МҒeвҖҷs paper \[17\], and is also very similar to the minimal angle defined in Section 5 of \[3\]. Definition 2.1.LetE, FвҠӮ Bbe subspaces. Theminimal angleОё(E, F)вҲҲ\[0, ПҖ 2 \] fromEtoFis defined by sinОё(E, F) = inf{|eвҲ’f|:eвҲҲE,|e|= 1, fвҲҲF}. Roughly speaking, the minimal angleОё(E, F) will be small wheneverEis inclined towardsF. Note thatОё(E, F) may not equalОё(F, E). The minimal angle has an interpretation in terms of splittings of Banach space. 6ALEX BLUMENTHAL Lemma 2.2.LetB=EвҠ•Fbe an algebraic splitting, and assumeE6={0}. Then,B=EвҠ•Fis topological if and only ifОё(E, F)>0, in which case we have sinОё(E, F) =|ПҖ E//F | вҲ’1 , whereПҖ E//F is the projection toEparallel toF. Proof.LetP=ПҖ E//F , which is well-defined and possibly unbounded whenB=EвҠ•Fis not topological. One computes |P|=sup eвҲҲE,fвҲҲF,e+f6=0 |e| |e+f| =sup eвҲҲE,|e|=1,fвҲҲF 1 |e+f| = 1 inf{|eвҲ’f|:eвҲҲE,|e|= 1, fвҲҲF} = 1 sinОё(E, F) , where we interpret the RHS of this formula asвҲһwheneverОё(E, F) = 0. It is crucial to also have access to complements for subspaces of finite dimension and codimension, as there is no assignment of an вҖҳorthogonal complementвҖҷ to closed subspaces of a Banach space. Lemma 2.3(III.B.10 and III.B.11 of \[29\]).FixqвҲҲN. For any subspaceEвҠӮ BwithdimE=q, there exists a topological complementFforEsuch thatsinОё(E, F)вүҘ 1 вҲҡ q , i.e.,|ПҖ E//F |вүӨ вҲҡ q. For any closed subspaceFвҠӮBwithcodimF=q, there exists a topological complementEforF such thatsinОё(F, E)вүҘ 1 вҲҡ q+2 , i.e.,|ПҖ F//E |вүӨ вҲҡ q+ 2. We will also need the following lemma regarding complements. Lemma 2.4.LetAвҲҲL(B)andE 1 вҠӮ Bbe a finite dimensional subspace for whichA| E 1 is injective. IfF 2 is a topological complement toE 2 :=AE 1 , thenF 1 ={vвҲҲ B:AvвҲҲF 2 }is a dimE 1 -codimensional subspace complementingE 1 . Moreover, ПҖ E 1 //F 1 = (A| E 1 ) вҲ’1 в—ҰПҖ E 2 //F 2 в—ҰA(2.1) Proof.LetP= (A| E 1 ) вҲ’1 в—ҰПҖ E 2 //F 2 в—ҰA, which is a bounded linear operator onBwith rangeE 1 вҠӮB. One computes thatP| E 1 is the identity onE 1 , and soPis a bounded projection operator. Define Мғ F= kerP, which is a topological complement toE 1 . WithF 1 :={vвҲҲB:AvвҲҲF 2 }, we will show that Мғ F=F 1 , as desired. First, letf 1 вҲҲF 1 . The definition ofPimpliesAв—ҰP f 1 =ПҖ E 2 //F 2 в—ҰAf 1 , butAf 1 вҲҲF 2 = kerПҖ E 2 //F 2 by assumption, and soAв—ҰP f 1 = 0. But we assumed thatA| E 1 is injective, and soP f 1 = 0; so, we have deduced that Мғ FвҠғF 1 . For the other inclusion, iffвҲҲ Мғ F, thenP f= 0 implies AfвҲҲkerПҖ E 2 //F 2 =F 2 , and sofвҲҲ{vвҲҲB:AvвҲҲF 2 }=F 1 follows, hence Мғ FвҠӮF 1 . 2.1.2.The Grassmanian on Banach Space.We denote byG(B) the space of closed subspaces ofB, endowed with the Hausdorff distance of unit spheres: forU, VвҲҲG(B), we set d H (U, V) =d H (S U , S V ),(2.2) whereS U ={uвҲҲU:|u|= 1}, and the Hausdorff distance between closed subsetsA, Bof a metric space is defined by d H (A, B) = max{sup aвҲҲA d(a, B),sup bвҲҲB d(b, A)}, whered(a, B) := inf{d(a, b) :bвҲҲB}. We defineG q (B) ={EвҲҲ G(B) : dimE=q}andG q (B) = {FвҲҲG(B) : codimF=q}. The following are some basic properties of the Hausdorff distanced H . Proposition 2.5(Chapter IV,В§2.1 of \[13\]).The metric space(G(B), d H )has the following prop- erties. A VOLUME-BASED APPROACH TO THE MULTIPLICATIVE ERGODIC THEOREM ON BANACH SPACES 7 (1)(G(B), d H )is complete. (2) The subsetsG q (B),G q (B)are closed in(G(B), d H ). It is actually somewhat inconvenient to compute directly withd H , and so frequently it will be easier to use thegap, defined forE, E вҖІ вҲҲG(B) by Оҙ(E, E вҖІ ) := sup eвҲҲE,|e|=1 d(e, E вҖІ ). Lemma 2.6.LetU, VвҲҲG(B). (1)Оҙ(U, V)вҲЁОҙ(V, U)вүӨd H (U, V)вүӨ2(Оҙ(U, V)вҲЁОҙ(V, U)). (2)Оҙ(U, V) =Оҙ(V в—Ұ , U в—Ұ ). (3) LetqвҲҲN, and assume either thatU, VвҲҲG q (B)or thatU, VвҲҲG q (B). IfОҙ(U, V)< 1 q , then Оҙ(V, U)вүӨ qОҙ(U, V) 1вҲ’qОҙ(U, V) .(2.3) Proof.Item 1 is proven in Chapter IV,В§2.1 of \[13\], and Item 2 is Lemma 2.8 in Chapter IV,В§2.3 of \[13\]. For Item 3, ifU, VвҲҲ G q (B), let{u 1 ,В·В·В·, u q }be a basis ofU: for anyОұ >1, we can obtain a basis{v i } q i=1 ofVby demanding that|u i вҲ’v i |вүӨОұОҙ(V, U). We can now comparev=c 1 v 1 +В·В·В·+c q v q withu:=c 1 u 1 +В·В·В·+c 1 u q , proving (2.3) in this case. ForU, VвҲҲ G q (B), note that by Item 2, Оҙ(U, V) =Оҙ(V в—Ұ , U в—Ұ ) andОҙ(V, U) =Оҙ(U в—Ұ , V в—Ұ ), and so we can apply theq-dimensional version of (2.3) to conclude in this case. WhenB=EвҠ•Fis a topological splitting, it is important to know when a subspaceE вҖІ вҠӮ B nearby toEis also complemented toF. Using intuition from finite dimensional geometry, it is reasonable to suggest that this involves the distanced H (E, E вҖІ ) and the inclination ofEtowardsF, namely sinОё(E, F). Proposition 2.7.LetB=EвҠ•Fbe a topological splitting. For anyE вҖІ вҲҲ G(B)for which d H (E, E вҖІ )<sinОё(E, F), we have thatB=E вҖІ вҠ•Fis a topological splitting, in which case the projectionПҖ F//E вҖІsatisfies |ПҖ F//E вҖІ| E |вүӨ 2d(E, E вҖІ ) |ПҖ E//F | вҲ’1 вҲ’d(E, E вҖІ ) .(2.4) The proof of Proposition 2.7 is given in full detail the Appendix. 2.1.3.Measure of Noncompactness.We close this section with a brief review of the measure of noncompactness|В·| Оұ . LetCвҠӮBbe a bounded set. We defineq(C) to be the infimum over the set of allr >0 for whichCadmits a finite open cover by|В·|-balls of radiusr. Definition 2.8.LetB,B вҖІ be two Banach spaces, and letAвҲҲL(B,B вҖІ ). We define the measure of noncompactness ofAto be|A| Оұ :=q(AB B ). |В·| Оұ and related notions are discussed in \[1\]. Definition 2.8 is actually given as Theorem 2.4.2 in \[1\], as|В·| Оұ is defined there in a different, yet equivalent, way. We now listsome of the properties of|В·| Оұ . Proposition 2.9(1.4.1 of \[1\]).|В·| Оұ is a submultiplicative seminorm onL(B,B вҖІ ). Precisely, let B,B вҖІ ,B вҖІвҖІ Banach spaces; forT, UвҲҲL(B,B вҖІ )andVвҲҲL(B вҖІ ,B вҖІвҖІ ), we have |T+U| Оұ вүӨ|T| Оұ +|U| Оұ , |V U| Оұ вүӨ|V| Оұ В·|U| Оұ . Moreover,Tis compact iff|T| Оұ = 0. 8ALEX BLUMENTHAL 2.2.Finite dimensional subspaces and the induced volume.In this part, we collect results on the induced volume in Definition 1.1. We begin this subsection by enumerating the most basic properties of the induced volume. Second, we will approximate the norm on a given finite dimensional subspace by an inner product, using JohnвҖҷs Theorem, obtaining access to the вҖҳexactвҖҷ identities and relations between volumes and angles for inner product spaces. Translating what we do in the inner product setting back into the normed vector space vocabulary, we will obtain estimates with errors depending only on the dimension. Third, we will consider the measurability properties of the maximalq-dimensional growthsV q defined in (1.2). Fourth, we will relateV q with the measure of noncompactness|В·| Оұ . 2.2.1.Basic Properties of the Induced Volume and Determinants.Recall from Section 1 that the induced volumem E for aq-dimensional subspaceEвҠӮ Bis the Haar measure onEnormalized so thatm E {vвҲҲE:|v| вүӨ1}=Пү q , the mass of the unit ball inR q . We now give the most basic properties ofm E . Lemma 2.10.LetqвҲҲNand letEвҠӮ Bbe aq-dimensional subspace. The induced volumem E satisfies the following. (1) For anyvвҲҲEand any BorelBвҠӮE, we havem E (v+B) =m E (B). (2) Ifm вҖІ is any other non-zero, translation-invariant measure onE, thenm вҖІ , m E are equivalent measures. The Radon-Nikodym derivative dm вҖІ dm E is constant onE, and equals m вҖІ (B) m E (B) , where BвҠӮEis any Borel set with positivem E -measure. (3) For anya >0and any Borel measurable setBвҠӮE, we havem E (aB) =a q m E (B). (4) Letw 1 ,В·В·В·, w q is any set of vectors inE, and writeP\[v 1 ,В·В·В·, v q \] ={ вҲ‘ q i=1 О» i v i : 0вүӨО» i вүӨ1} for the parallelepiped spanned by{v 1 ,В·В·В·, v q }. Then, for anya >0, m E P\[aw 1 , w 2 ,В·В·В·, w q \] =aВ·m E P\[w 1 ,В·В·В·, w q \]. Proof.These all follow from the uniqueness of Haar measure \[8\], except for Item 4, which has a simple proof following from Proposition 2.14. Remark 2.11.The normalization in Definition 1.1 for the induced volume was introduced by Busemann \[5\] as a way of assigning volume elements to Finslermanifolds, where the tangent spaces are normed vector spaces, not inner product spaces. For moreon this, see Chapter I,В§8 of \[23\]. Recall now the definition of the determinant. Definition 2.12.LetAвҲҲL(B,B вҖІ ) be a map of Banach spaces, and letEвҠӮ Bbe a finite dimen- sional subspace. We define the determinant det(A|E) ofAonEby det(A|E) = { m AE (AB E ) m E (B E ) A| E injective, 0otherwise. The following are some basic properties of this determinant. Proposition 2.13(Basic Properties of the Determinant).LetE, F, Gbe normed vector spaces of the same finite dimension, and letA:EвҶ’F, B:FвҶ’Gbe linear maps. (1) For any Borel setO вҠӮEwithm E (O)>0, det(A|E) = m F (AO) m E (O) , and sodet(A|E)coincides with the Radon-Nikodym derivative d(m F в—ҰA) dm E , where(m F в—ҰA)(O) := m F (AO)for BorelO вҠӮE. (2) IfAis not injective onE, thendet(A|E) = 0. (3)det(BA|E) = det(B|F)В·det(A|E). Proof.All these follow, once again, from the uniqueness of Haar measure. A VOLUME-BASED APPROACH TO THE MULTIPLICATIVE ERGODIC THEOREM ON BANACH SPACES 9 2.2.2.Approximation by Inner Products.Every pair of norms on a finite dimensional vector space is equivalent, and so given any finite dimensional subspaceEвҠӮ B, one can always compare the norm onEwithanychoice of inner product (В·,В·) onE. There is no control, however, on how bad this approximation can be, and so we must take care to ensure our approximating inner product is not too far off from the original norm. The approximation we use here comes from the following version of JohnвҖҷs theorem. Proposition 2.14.LetqвҲҲN, and letEвҠӮ Bbe aq-dimensional subspace. Then, there exists an inner product(В·,В·) E onEfor which the following hold. (1) The normkВ·k E induced by(В·,В·) E satisfies the inequality 1 вҲҡ q |v|вүӨkvk E вүӨ вҲҡ q|v|.(2.5) for allvвҲҲE. (2) The induced volumem E coincides with the Lebesgue volume onEarising from the inner product(В·,В·) E . Proof.This is merely a re-telling of JohnвҖҷs theorem (Theorem 15 in Chapter 4 of \[4\]), which asserts that given any convex bodyCвҠӮR n which contains 0 in its interior and is symmetric about the origin, there is a unique ellipsoidDcontainingC, having minimal volume among all ellipsoids containingC; additionally,Dsatisfies the inclusion 1 вҲҡ n DвҠӮC. Noting that ellipsoids centered at 0 inR n are in one-to-one correspondence with inner products onR n , we let (В·,В·) refer to the inner product from JohnвҖҷs Theorem applied to the unit ballB E of (E,|В·|). We modify (В·,В·) by a scalar to define the inner product (В·,В·) E : the scalar is chosen so that the Lebesgue volume of (В·,В·) E and the induced volumem E coincide. By Item 2 of Lemma 2.10, this is ensured by the conditionm E {vвҲҲE:kvk E вүӨ1}=Пү q . The bound in (2.5) follows from the fact that the normkВ·kinduced by the JohnвҖҷs theorem inner product (В·,В·) satisfieskvkвүӨ|v|вүӨ вҲҡ qkvkfor allvвҲҲE. Notation.For the remainder of this subsection,qвҲҲNis fixed, and ifa, b >0 are real numbers, we will writea.bif there is a constantC q depending only onqfor whichaвүӨC q b, and similarly fora&b. We writeaвүҲbifa.banda&bhold. For example, (2.5) in Proposition 2.14 can be written askvk E вүҲ|v|forvвҲҲE. We now pursue the program of using (В·,В·) E ,kВ·k E to deduce approximate identities for the induced volumem E . There are two applications we will cover in this section: the first is a way of estimating вҖҳblockвҖҷ determinants, and the second involves estimating determinants in terms of special bases. Application 1: Estimating вҖҳBlock DeterminantsвҖҷ. LetV=EвҠ•Fbe a splitting of a finite dimensional subspaceVвҠӮ B, where dimV=qand dimE=k=qвҲ’dimFfor somek < q. ForAвҲҲL(B), our goal is to estimate det(A|V) in terms of the product det(A|E)В·det(A|F). The point of departure for us is the explicit formula for the volume of a parallelepiped in an inner product space: whenv 1 ,В·В·В·, v q вҲҲV, m V P\[v 1 ,В·В·В·, v q \] =kv q k V В· qвҲ’1 вҲҸ i=1 d V (v i ,hv j :i < jвүӨqi),(2.6) whered V refers to the minimal distance taken using thekВ·k V norm. Letv 1 ,В·В·В·, v k andv k+1 ,В·В·В·, v q be|В·|-unit vector bases forE, Frespectively, and observe that because of this choice, m V P\[v 1 ,В·В·В·, v q \] =m V P\[v k+1 ,В·В·В·, v q \]В· k вҲҸ i=1 d V (v i ,hv j :i < jвүӨqi) 10ALEX BLUMENTHAL holds by formula (2.6) form V P\[v k+1 ,В·В·В·, v q \], where we abuse notation and letm V refer also to the volume onFarising from the restriction ofkВ·k V toF. On the other hand,kvk V вүҲ|v|вүҲkvk F by (2.5) for allvвҲҲF, from which we deducem V P\[v k+1 ,В·В·В·, v q \]вүҲm F P\[v k+1 ,В·В·В·, v q \] by Lemma 2.10, Items 2 and 3. Collecting this, m V P\[v 1 ,В·В·В·, v q \]вүҲm F P\[v k+1 ,В·В·В·, v q \]В· k вҲҸ i=1 d(v i ,hv j :i < jвүӨqi).(2.7) Observe thatd(v i ,hv j :i < jвүӨqi) = sinОё(hv i i,hv j :i < jвүӨqi) =|ПҖ hv i i//hv j :j<iвүӨqi | вҲ’1 by Lemma 2.2, so we must estimate|ПҖ hv i i//hv j :j<iвүӨqi |from above and below. Note thatПҖ hv i i//hv j :j<iвүӨqi = ПҖ hv i i//hv j :i<jвүӨki в—ҰПҖ E//F andПҖ hv i i//hv j :i<jвүӨki =ПҖ hv i i//hv j :i<jвүӨqi | E , so it follows that d(v i ,hv j :i < jвүӨki) вҲ’1 =|ПҖ hv i i//hv j :i<jвүӨki |вүӨ|ПҖ hv i i//hv j :j<iвүӨqi | вүӨ|ПҖ E//F |В·|ПҖ hv i i//hv j :i<jвүӨki |=|ПҖ E//F |В·d(v i ,hv j :i < jвүӨki) вҲ’1 . An application of (2.6) tom E P\[v 1 ,В·В·В·, v k \] now implies |ПҖ E//F | вҲ’1 . m V P\[v 1 ,В·В·В·, v q \] m E P\[v 1 ,В·В·В·, v k \]В·m F P\[v k+1 ,В·В·В·, v q \] .1,(2.8) as long as the denominator of the central term in (2.8) is nonzero. Having estimated in this way, one can now estimate the determinant det(A|V) by considering (2.8) applied to the parallelepipedsP\[v 1 ,В·В·В·, v q \] andP\[Av 1 ,В·В·В·, Av q \] =AP\[v 1 ,В·В·В·, v q \]. We collect the results in the following lemma. Lemma 2.15.LetAвҲҲL(B)andVвҠӮ Bhave dimensionq. LetV=EвҠ•Fbe a splitting with dimE=k < q, and assume thatA| V is injective. WritingV вҖІ =AV, E вҖІ =AE, F вҖІ =AF, we have the estimate 1 |ПҖ E вҖІ //F вҖІ| k . det(A|V) det(A|E) det(A|F) .|ПҖ E//F | k . Remark 2.16.Observe that Lemma 1.2 for aq-dimensional subspaceEвҠӮBfollows straightaway from (2.6) applied to the normkВ·k E , using (2.5) to compare|В·|withkВ·k E . Application 2: Estimating Determinants from Bases. LetqвҲҲN,AвҲҲL(B), and letVвҠӮBbe aq-dimensional subspace. We will give here an estimate for det(A|V) in terms of a special kind of basis forV. To begin, form a (В·,В·) V -orthonormal set v 1 ,В·В·В·, v q ofVand recall the Hadamard bound for the determinant: det(A|V)вүӨ q вҲҸ i=1 kAv i k V вҖІ ,(2.9) whereV вҖІ =AV. More refined information is realized using the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD): if{v i }is an orthonormal SVD basis forA| V on (V,(В·,В·) V ) (that is, a (В·,В·) V -orthonormal basis of eigenvectors of (A| V ) вҲ— A| V , where the adjoint (A| V ) вҲ— is taken with respect to (V,(В·,В·) V ) and (V вҖІ ,(В·,В·) V вҖІ )), then det(A|V) = q вҲҸ i=1 kAv i k V вҖІ ,(2.10) and whenA| V is injective, the set{w i }defined byw i =Av i /kAv i k V вҖІ forms a (В·,В·) V вҖІ -orthonormal set (as{w i }is a set of eigenvectors for (A| V )(A| V ) вҲ— ). All this motivates the following definition. Definition 2.17.LetVвҠӮ Bbe a subspace of dimensionq. A basis of|В·|-unit vectorsv 1 ,В·В·В·, v q forVis called analmost orthonormalbasis if it is (В·,В·) V -orthogonal. A VOLUME-BASED APPROACH TO THE MULTIPLICATIVE ERGODIC THEOREM ON BANACH SPACES 11 We now apply (2.5) to each of (2.9) and (2.10), obtaining the following. Proposition 2.18.LetAвҲҲL(B)and letVвҠӮBbe a subspace withdimV=q. (1) (Hadamard Bound) Ifv 1 ,В·В·В·, v q is an almost orthonormal basis ofV, then det(A|V). q вҲҸ i=1 |Av i | (2) (Singular Value Decomposition) There exists an almost orthonormal basisv 1 ,В·В·В·, v q forV such that det(A)вүҲ q вҲҸ i=1 |Av i | WriteV вҖІ =AV. IfA:VвҶ’V вҖІ is invertible, then the basisw i =Av i /|Av i |forV вҖІ is almost orthonormal. The following is a simple corollary of Proposition 2.18, relating the minimal expansion of a linear map on a finite dimensional subspace to volume growth on that subspace. Corollary 2.19.LetAвҲҲL(B)andEвҠӮBbe aq-dimensional subspace. For anyvвҲҲE\\{0}, |Av| |v| В·|A| E | qвҲ’1 &det(A|E). 2.2.3.The Determinant and Measurability.We now give a lemma on the continuity properties of the determinant and the maximalq-dimensional growthV q , defined forAвҲҲL(B) by V q (A) = sup{det(A|E) : dimE=q}. Lemma 2.20.LetqвҲҲN, and letEвҠӮBbeq-dimensional subspace. (1) IfT n вҶ’Tin norm onL(B), thendet(T n |E)вҶ’det(T|E). (2) IfT n вҶ’Tin norm onL(B), thenV q (T n )вҶ’V q (T). Proof.We begin by proving the following. Claim 2.21.IfA n , A:VвҶ’V вҖІ are injective linear maps betweenq-dimensional normed vector spacesV, V вҖІ , andA n вҶ’Ain operator norm, then det(A n |V)вҶ’det(A|V). Proof of Claim.For two injective mapsA, B:VвҶ’V вҖІ , it is simple to show that B вҲ’1 A ( B V ) вҠӮ(1 +|B вҲ’1 |В·|AвҲ’B|)B V , whereB V is the closed unit ball ofV. Using Item 3 of Lemma 2.10, it follows thatm V ( B вҲ’1 A(B V ) ) вүӨ (1 +|B вҲ’1 |В·|AвҲ’B|) q , and since det(B вҲ’1 A|V) =Пү вҲ’1 q В·m V ( B вҲ’1 A(B V ) ) , it follows from the multi- plicativity of the determinant as in Item 3 of Proposition 2.13 that det(A|V) det(B|V) вүӨ(1 +|B вҲ’1 |В·|AвҲ’B|) q . Exchanging the roles ofAandBand taking a logarithm, we arrive at (2.11) вҲЈ вҲЈ вҲЈ вҲЈ log det(A|V) det(B|V) вҲЈ вҲЈ вҲЈ вҲЈ вүӨqlog ( 1 + ( |A вҲ’1 |вҲЁ|B вҲ’1 | ) В·|AвҲ’B| ) , whereaвҲЁb:= max{a, b}fora, bвҲҲR. We will also make use of the elementary estimate (2.12)|B вҲ’1 |вүӨ ( |A вҲ’1 | вҲ’1 вҲ’|AвҲ’B| ) вҲ’1 , which holds when the parenthetical quantity on the RHS of (2.12) is nonnegative. Applying (2.11) to the situationB=A n , and takingnsufficiently large so that|A вҲ’1 n |вүӨ2|A вҲ’1 |, by (2.12), we see now that|A n вҲ’A| вҶ’0 implies|log det(A вҲ’1 n в—ҰA|V)| вҶ’0, i.e., det(A n |V)вҶ’ det(A|V), as desired. 12ALEX BLUMENTHAL Proof of Item 1.If det(T|E) = 0, letvвҲҲEbe a unit vector for whichT v= 0. By Corollary 2.19, det(T n |E)вүӨC q |T n | E | qвҲ’1 |T n v|, whereC q >0 depends onqalone. The right hand side goes to zero asnвҶ’ вҲһwhenT n | E вҶ’T| E in norm, and so det(T n |E)вҶ’0. So, from here on we assume det(T|E)6= 0. To complete the proof of Item 1 in this case, one can compute using Item 1 of Lemma 2.6 that d H (T n E, T E)вүӨ2 ( |(T| E ) вҲ’1 |вҲЁ|(T n | E ) вҲ’1 | ) В·|T n вҲ’T|.(2.13) By (2.12), fornlarge enough,|(T n | E ) вҲ’1 |вүӨ2|(T| E ) вҲ’1 |, henced H (T n E, T E)вҶ’0 asnвҶ’вҲһ. It now follows by Proposition 2.7 that ifFвҠӮ Bis a fixed topological complement toT E, then T n Eis complemented toFfornsufficiently large. SinceПҖ T n E//F | T E в—ҰПҖ T E//F | T n E = Id T n E , the identity onT n E, we may now decompose det(T n |E) det(T|E) = det(ПҖ T n E//F |T E)В· ( det(ПҖ T E//F в—ҰT n |E) det(T|E) ) .(2.14) Note that the parenthetical term on the RHS of (2.14) goes to 1asnвҶ’ вҲһby Claim 2.21, becauseT| E =ПҖ T E//F в—ҰT| E , so thatПҖ T E//F в—ҰT n | E вҶ’T| E in norm inL(E, T E). So, we estimate the remaining term on the RHS of (2.14); however, sinceT n EвҶ’T Ein the Hausdorff distance, it follows by (2.4) thatПҖ F//T n E | T E вҶ’0 in norm asnвҶ’вҲһ. BecauseПҖ T n E//F | T E = Id T E вҲ’ПҖ F//T n E | T E , it follows by a simple argument involving Lemma 2.10 that det(ПҖ T n E//F |T E)вҶ’1, as desired. Proof of Item 2.IfV q (T) = 0, then an argument similar to the beginning of the proof ofItem 1 lets us concludeV q (T n )вҶ’V q (T). Hereafter we assume thatV q (T)>0. Note that V q (T)вүӨlim inf nвҶ’вҲһ V q (T n )(2.15) follows immediately from Item 1: for any subspaceEвҠӮBwith dimensionq, det(T|E) = lim nвҶ’вҲһ det(T n |E)вүӨ lim inf nвҶ’вҲһ V q (T n ). So, it suffices to show lim sup nвҶ’вҲһ V q (T n )вүӨV q (T). For eachn, letE n вҠӮBbe a subspace of dimensionqfor whichV q (T n )вүӨ(1 + 1 n ) det(T n |E n ). We takenlarge enough so thatV q (T)вүӨ2V q (T n ), using (2.15). Now, by Corollary 2.19, V q (T)вүӨ2V q (T n )вүӨ2 ( 1 + 1 n ) det(T n |E n )вүӨ4C q |T n | qвҲ’1 В·|(T n | E n ) вҲ’1 | вҲ’1 , whereC q >0 depends onqalone, and so takingnlarge enough so that|T n | вүӨ2|T|, we have that|(T n | E n ) вҲ’1 | вүӨD, whereDis a constant independent ofn. Applying (2.12), we also obtain |(T| E n ) вҲ’1 |вүӨ2Dfornsufficiently large. Because we can bound|(T n | E n ) вҲ’1 |,|(T| E n ) вҲ’1 |from above independently ofn, we can apply (2.13) to the subspaceE n in place ofE, obtainingd H (T n E n , T E n )вҶ’0 asnвҶ’вҲһ. For eachn, letF n be a complement toE n with|ПҖ T E n //F n | вүӨ вҲҡ q(Lemma 2.3). So, by Proposition 2.7, we deduce that fornsufficiently large,T n E n complementsF n . We now decompose det(T n |E n ) det(T|E n ) = det(ПҖ T n E n //F n |T E n )В· ( det(ПҖ T E n //F n в—ҰT n |E n ) det(T|E n ) ) ,(2.16) analogously to (2.14). The estimate (2.11) and the fact that|(T n | E n ) вҲ’1 |,|(T| E n ) вҲ’1 |вүӨ2Dimply that the parenthetical term on the RHS of (2.16) goes to 1 asnвҶ’вҲһ. The fact thatПҖ F n //T n E n | T E n вҶ’0 in norm (following from (2.4) and thatd H (T n E n , T E n )вҶ’0) implies that the remaining RHS term of (2.16) goes to 1, analogously to the proof of Item 1. Therefore, the LHS of (2.16) goes to 1 as nвҶ’вҲһ, and we conclude that lim sup nвҶ’вҲһ V q (T n )вүӨV q (T), as desired. A VOLUME-BASED APPROACH TO THE MULTIPLICATIVE ERGODIC THEOREM ON BANACH SPACES 13 2.2.4.Global Geometry and the Induced Volume.We will now discuss properties of the induced volume which depend on the Banach space at large. We will givea relation betweenV q and the Gelfand numbers, and a relation to the measure of noncompactness|В·| Оұ . The Gelfand Numbers and Maximal Volume Growth. For an operatorAon a Hilbert space,V q (A) (defined by (1.2)) is equal to the product of the firstqsingular values ofA, i.e., the product of the highestqeigenvalues of вҲҡ A вҲ— A(Proposition 1.4 in Chapter V of \[26\]). As a consequence, one can think of theq-th Lyapunov exponent (with multiplicity) of a cocycle as the generic asymptotic growthrate of theq-th singular value of high iterates of the cocycle \[20, 21\]. In this section, we will recover this identification for a suitable generalization of вҖҳsingular valueвҖҷ to the Banach space setting, a fact to be put to use in Section 3. The idea of вҖҳsingular valuesвҖҷ has been generalized in several nonequivalent ways for Banach spaces: for an account, see \[19\]. The definition we shall employ here is that of theGelfand numbers c q (В·),qвҲҲN, defined forAвҲҲL(B) by c q (A) = inf{|A| R |:Rclosed, codimR=qвҲ’1},(2.17) withc 1 (A) :=|A|(Chapter 2, Section 4 of \[19\]). Notice that{c q (A)} q is a decreasing sequence, and so we definec(A) := lim m c m (A) = inf m c m (A). Observe thatc(A) = inf{|A| R |:Rclosed, codimR < вҲһ}; this is a different kind of measure of noncompactness from|В·| Оұ (2.4.10 in \[1\]), and as we will see in Lemma 2.23, is equivalent to|В·| Оұ . We will now show thatV q (A) is approximated by the product of the firstqGelfand numbers c i (A). Lemma 2.22.LetqвҲҲN. For anyAвҲҲL(B), V q (A)вүҲc q (A)V qвҲ’1 (A).(2.18) whereвүҲdepends onqalone. Proof.We prove.,&separately. AssumeV qвҲ’1 (A)>0, since otherwise,Ais a finite rank operator of rankвүӨqвҲ’2 and (2.18) is trivial. To prove&, letVвҠӮ Bbe a subspace of dimensionqfor which det(A|V)вүҘ 1 2 V q (A), and let RвҠӮBhave codimensionqвҲ’1 such that|A| R |вүӨ2c q (A). Note that dimRвҲ©VвүҘ1 by the definition of codimension; fixwвҲҲRвҲ©Vwith|w|= 1. Let V 0 вҠӮVbe a complement tohwiinVfor which|ПҖ hwi//V |= 1 (by Lemma 2.3). We now estimate using the вҖҳblock determinantвҖҷ estimate in Lemma 2.15: V q (A)вүӨ2 det(A|V).det(A|V 0 ) det(A|hwi)вүӨV qвҲ’1 (A)|Aw| вүӨ2V qвҲ’1 (A)c q (A), which is what we wanted. To prove., letEвҠӮBbe a subspace of dimensionqвҲ’1 for which det(A|E)вүҘ 1 2 V qвҲ’1 (A). Now, AEhas dimensionqвҲ’1 (fromV qвҲ’1 (A)>0), so by Lemma 2.3, we can find a (qвҲ’1)-codimensional complementF 2 вҠӮ Bfor which|ПҖ AE//F 2 | вүӨ вҲҡ qвҲ’1. By Lemma 2.4,F 1 :={vвҲҲ B:AvвҲҲF 2 }has codimensionqвҲ’1. LetwвҲҲF 1 ,|w|= 1. Using the lower bound in Lemma 2.15, we estimate V q (A)вүҘdet(A|EвҠ•hwi)&det(A|E) det(A|hwi)вүҘ 1 2 V qвҲ’1 (A)|Aw| This inequality holds for anywвҲҲF 1 ,|w|= 1, and so implies an upper bound on|A| F 1 |, which is вүҘc q (A) by definition. This completes the estimate. Measures of Noncompactness and Maximal Volume Growth. Like singular values of operators in Hilbert space, the Gelfand numbers can detect compactness and estimate the measure of noncompactness|В·| Оұ in the following sense. 14ALEX BLUMENTHAL Lemma 2.23(2.5.5 in \[1\]).LetAвҲҲL(B). Then, 1 2 |A| Оұ вүӨc(A)вүӨ2|A| Оұ . The maximal volume growthsV q also have a relation to|В·| Оұ . Proposition 2.24.LetAвҲҲL(B). Using the conventionlog 0 =вҲ’вҲһ, we have that lim sup qвҶ’вҲһ 1 q logV q (A)вүӨlog(2|A| Оұ ).(2.19) Proof.ForxвҲҲBandr >0, we denoteB(x, r) ={vвҲҲB:|vвҲ’x|< r}. IfAis an operator of finite rank, then (2.19) holds vacuously, and so we can assume without loss thatV q (A)>0 for allqвҲҲN. Fixr >|A| Оұ and let{B(x i , r)} C r i=1 be a finite cover ofA ( B(0,1) ) by balls of radiusrcentered at pointsx i вҲҲ B. For eachqвҲҲN, letE q вҠӮ Bbe aq-dimensional subspace for whichV q (A)вүӨ 2 det(A|E q ). WritingAE q =E вҖІ q , note that dimE вҖІ q =q, and that m E вҖІ q ( E вҖІ q вҲ©A ( B(0,1) ) ) =m E вҖІ q ( A(B E q ) ) вүӨ C r вҲ‘ i=1 m E вҖІ q ( E вҖІ q вҲ©B(x i , r) ) . As one can easily check, for Hilbert spaces we have thatm E вҖІ q ( E вҖІ q вҲ©B(x i , r) ) вүӨr q Пү q , with equality whenx i вҲҲE вҖІ q . For Banach spaces, the following can be recovered. Claim 2.25.LetEвҠӮ Bbe aq-dimensional subspace with dimE=q <вҲһ. For anyxвҲҲ B, we have thatm E ( EвҲ©B(x, r) ) вүӨ(2r) q Пү q . From Claim 2.25, we obtain m E вҖІ q ( E вҖІ q вҲ©AB(0,1) ) вүӨC r (2r) q Пү q , henceV q (A)вүӨ2 det(A|E q )вүӨ2C r (2r) q . This implies (2.19). Proof of Claim 2.25.LetFbe a topological complement toEinB(Lemma 2.3), and decompose x=e+f. Iff= 0, thenxвҲҲEand Claim 2.25 is obvious: so, we may assumef6= 0. Moreover, without loss, we can takee= 0 by the the translation invariance ofm E onE. Applying the Riesz Lemma (Lemma 4.7 ofВ§4.1 in \[24\]) toEвҠӮEвҠ•hfi, there exists a unit vector gвҲҲEвҠ•hfifor whichd(g, E) = 1; equivalently,|ПҖ hgi//E |= 1 (Lemma 2.2). Writingf=e 0 +ag, withaвҲҲR,e 0 вҲҲE, we will show thatB(f, r)вҲ©EвҠӮB(e 0 ,2r), which implies Claim 2.25. To see this, we estimate: ifvвҲҲB(f, r)вҲ©E, then|vвҲ’f|< r, and so |vвҲ’e 0 |=|ПҖ E//hgi (vвҲ’(e 0 +ag))|вүӨ|ПҖ E//hgi |В·|vвҲ’f|<2r, which is what we wanted. 3.Lyapunov Exponents for Banach Space Cocycles In this section, we prove our main result, Theorem 1.3, by emulating RuelleвҖҷs proof in \[21, 22\]. We will begin by using the measurability assumption (1.3) and Lemma 2.20 to obtain the Lyapunov exponents and show they may accumulate only at the asymptotic exponential growth ratel Оұ of |T n x | Оұ . Then, we will state our primary tool, Proposition 3.4, which should be thought of as a вҖҳtrajectory-wiseвҖҷ version of the MET which extracts the вҖҳslowвҖҷ growing subspace corresponding to the second Lyapunov exponent, and show using an inductionprocedure (Lemma 3.6) how to complete the proof. Remaining at that point will be to prove Proposition 3.4 and Lemma 3.6, and to prove the volume growth (1.5) in Theorem 1.3, which we formulate as Lemma 3.9. A VOLUME-BASED APPROACH TO THE MULTIPLICATIVE ERGODIC THEOREM ON BANACH SPACES 15 3.1.Lyapunov Exponents forT.In this section, we find the Lyapunov exponents for the cocycle Tusing growth rates, and prove their basic properties. To begin, the following is an immediate consequence of Item 2 in Lemma 2.20. Corollary 3.1.Assume that the cocycleT:XвҶ’L(B)satisfies the measurability hypothesis(1.3). Then, for anyn, qвүҘ1, the mapx7вҶ’V q (T n x )is measurable as a map(X,F)вҶ’(R,Bor(R)). We note as well that the mapx7вҶ’ |T n x | Оұ is measurable fornвүҘ1 (note|A| Оұ вүӨ |A|forAвҲҲL(B)). The following identifies the Lyapunov exponents of the cocycleTin terms of volume growth. Lemma 3.2.LetT:XвҶ’L(B)be a map satisfying(1.3). Assume as well that вҲ« X log + |T x |dОј(x)<вҲһ.(3.1) Then, the following hold. (1) For anyqвүҘ1, the exponential growth ratesl q , defined by l q = lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n logV q (T n x ),(3.2) exist and are constantОј-almost surely. (2) WritingK 1 =l 1 , K q =l q вҲ’l qвҲ’1 forq >1, the sequence{K q } qвүҘ1 is nonincreasing, i.e., K 1 вүҘK 2 вүҘВ·В·В·. (3) Definingl Оұ = lim qвҶ’вҲһ K q , we have thatОј-almost surely, lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log|T n x | Оұ =l Оұ Remark 3.3.We writeО» 1 > О» 2 >В·В·В·for the distinct values of the sequence{K q } q . There may be finitely many of these, in which case the last of these values is equal tol Оұ , or infinitely many, in which caseО» i вҶ’l Оұ asiвҶ’ вҲһ. We writem i for the multiplicity of the valueО» i amongst the sequence{K q } q andM 1 := 0, M i :=m 1 +В·В·В·+m iвҲ’1 foriвүҘ2. Proof.Item 1.The almost sure convergence of 1 n logV q (T n x ) follows immediately from the Kingman Subadditive Ergodic Theorem (KSET) (В§1.5 of \[15\]), in light of the integrability hypothesis (3.1) and the measurability ofx7вҶ’V q (T n x ) (Corollary 3.1), since V q (T n+m x )вүӨV q (T m f n x )В·V q (T n x ) by the multiplicativity of the determinant as in Proposition 2.13. Item 2.From Lemma 2.22, one has that V q (T n x )вүҲc 1 (T n x )В·c 2 (T n x )В·В·В·c q (T n x ), whereвүҲdepends only onq, and so one can see directly from the convergence of the sequences 1 n logV q (T n x ) asnвҶ’вҲһthat the growth rates of the Gelfand numbers 1 n logc q (T n x ) converge toK q asnвҶ’ вҲһfor anyqвүҘ1. Obviously,c q (В·)вүҘc q+1 (В·) for anyqвүҘ1, and soK 1 вүҘK 2 вүҘ В·В·В·follows immediately. Item 3.Recall thatc(A) = inf q c q (A). Note that almost surely, K q = lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n logc q (T n x )вүҘlim sup nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n logc(T n x ). By Lemma 2.23, takingqвҶ’вҲһlets us deducel Оұ вүҘlim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log|T n x | Оұ . For the other direction, the limit asqвҶ’вҲһof the Cesaro averages 1 q l q equalsl Оұ . Recall that 1 q l q is decreasing, and that by the KSET, the limit in (3.2) holds almost surely and inL 1 (В§1.5 of \[15\]); 16ALEX BLUMENTHAL in particular,l q = inf n 1 n вҲ« logV q (T n x )dОј(x). Now, using Proposition 2.24, l Оұ = inf q 1 q l q = inf q inf n 1 qn вҲ« logV q (T n x )dОј(x) = inf n inf q 1 qn вҲ« logV q (T n x )dОј(x) вүӨinf n 1 n lim sup q вҲ« 1 q logV q (T n x )dОј(x)вүӨinf n 1 n вҲ« log(2|T n x | Оұ )dОј(x)вүӨlim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n вҲ« log|T n x | Оұ dОј(x). In the second line we use the Reverse Fatou Lemma. By the KSET we have that lim n 1 n log|T n x | Оұ exists and coincides almost surely with lim n 1 n вҲ« log|T n x | Оұ dОј(x). This completes the estimate. 3.2.Proof of Theorem 1.3.For the remainder of this section, we give the volume-based proof of Theorem 1.3. 3.2.1.A вҖҳtrajectory-wiseвҖҷ version of the MET.Below, we state a version of the MET, to be applied one trajectory at a time: this the analogue of Proposition 2.1 in Section 2 of RuelleвҖҷs paper \[22\]. We refer to the norms on the spacesV i below with the same symbol|В·|. Proposition 3.4.LetV 0 , V 1 , V 2 ,В·В·В·be Banach spaces and letT i :V i вҶ’V i+1 be a sequence of bounded linear maps. WriteT n =T nвҲ’1 в—ҰВ·В·В·в—ҰT 0 , and assume the following of{T n }. (1)lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log + |T n |= 0. (2) For anyqвҲҲN, the following limits exist: L q = lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n logV q (T n ). (3) Writingk 1 =L 1 , k q =L q вҲ’L qвҲ’1 forq >1, we have that for somem <вҲһ, О»:=k 1 =В·В·В·= k m > k m+1 =:О» . Then, the subspaceF :={vвҲҲV 0 : lim sup nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log|T n v| вүӨО» }is closed andm-codimensional. For anyvвҲҲV 0 \\F , lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log|T n v|= О» For anyО·вҲҲ(0,1), the former convergence occurs uniformly over vectors in the coneC О· ={vвҲҲ B:d(v, F )вүҘО·|v|}in the following sense: lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log inf vвҲҲC О· \\{0} |T n v| |v| = О».(3.3) In particular, lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log det(T n |E) =m О»(3.4) for any complementEtoF . We now show how to derive all of Theorem 1.3 from Proposition 3.4, except for (1.5). Below, we assume that there are infinitely many distinct Lyapunov exponents- the proof for when there are finitely many distinct exponents is virtually identical. Proof of Theorem 1.3 from Proposition 3.4.We define О“вҠӮXto be the set of allxвҲҲXsuch that the limit lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n logV q (T n x ) exists and equalsl q , and for which (3.5)lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log + |T f n x |= 0. The condition (3.5) isОј-generic by the Birkhoff Ergodic Theorem and the integrability hypothesis вҲ« X log + |T x |dОј(x)<вҲһ. For eachxвҲҲО“, the sequenceT n :=T f n x satisfies the hypotheses of Proposition 3.4, and so we obtain the following, which can be thought of as the MET for the first Lyapunov exponent. Below, withF О» (x) as in (1.4), we defineF i (x) :=F О» i (x) for Lyapunov exponentsО» i as in Remark 3.3. A VOLUME-BASED APPROACH TO THE MULTIPLICATIVE ERGODIC THEOREM ON BANACH SPACES 17 Lemma 3.5.LetT:XвҶ’L(B)satisfy the hypotheses of Lemma 3.2, and letО» 1 , О» 2 , m 1 be as in Remark 3.3. Then, for eachxвҲҲО“,F 2 (x)ism 1 -codimensional, and satisfies вҲҖvвҲҲB\\F 2 (x),lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log|T n x v|=О» 1 The former convergence occurs uniformly over vectors in the coneC О· (x) ={vвҲҲ B:d(v, F 2 (x))вүҘ О·|v|}, in the following sense. lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log min vвҲҲC О· (x)\\{0} |T n x v| |v| =О» 1 . As a consequence, for any complementEtoF 2 (x), we have that lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log det(T n x |E) =m 1 О» 1 .(3.6) We now formulate an induction step, to show that the hypotheses of Proposition 3.4 are satisfied for the sequenceT 0 :=T x | F 2 (x) , T n =T f n x , with the Lyapunov exponents вҖҳshifted downвҖҷ so as to eliminate the top exponentО» 1 . Lemma 3.6(Exponent Extraction Lemma).For anyxвҲҲО“, we have thatlim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n logV q (T n x | F 2 (x) ) exists and equalsl q+m 1 вҲ’l m 1 for anyqвүҘ1. We will prove this in Section 3.2.3. One now has that the sequence of operators defined byT 0 := T x | F 2 (x) ,T n :=T f n x , n >0, satisfies the hypotheses of Proposition 3.4 with О»=О» 2 , О»=О» 3 , m=m 2 , and the subspaceF вҠӮF 2 (x) as in the statement of Proposition 3.4 isF 3 (x). We obtain that the codimension ofF 3 (x) inF 2 (x) ism 2 , and so codimF 3 (x) =M 3 =m 1 +m 2 , and вҲҖvвҲҲF 2 (x)\\F 3 (x),lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log|T n x v|=О» 2 . Inductively, assume that we have already shown thatF i (x) has codimensionM i , and that for any 1вүӨjвүӨiвҲ’1, вҲҖvвҲҲF j (x)\\F j+1 (x),lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log|T n x v|=О» j for allxвҲҲО“. Under this condition, one can show, repeating the argument in the proof of Lemma 3.6, that for anyxвҲҲО“, the limit lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n logV q (T n x | F i (x) ) exists for anyqвүҘ1 and equalsl q+M i вҲ’l M i . Therefore,T 0 :=T x | F i (x) , T n :=T f n x , n >0 satisfies the hypotheses of Proposition 3.4 with О»= О» i , О» =О» i+1 , m=m i , andF=F i+1 (x). We obtain that the codimension ofF i+1 (x) inF i (x) ism i , hence codimF i+1 (x) =M i+1 , and that вҲҖvвҲҲF i (x)\\F i+1 (x),lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log|T n x v|=О» i . This completes the induction argument. We now give the proofs of Proposition 3.4 and Lemma 3.6, and the proof of the volume growth formula in (1.5), formulated as Lemma 3.9. 3.2.2.Proof of Proposition 3.4. Proof of Proposition 3.4.For eachn, letE 1 n be anm-dimensional subspace ofV 0 for which det(T n |E 1 n )вүҘ 1 2 V m (T n ), and defineE 2 n =T n E 1 n . LetF 2 n be a complement toE 2 n , as in Lemma 2.3, for whichP 2 n :=ПҖ E 2 n //F 2 n satisfies|P 2 n |вүӨ вҲҡ m. LetF 1 n ={vвҲҲV 0 :T n vвҲҲF 2 n }; this is a complement toE 1 n by Lemma 2.4. We writeP 1 n =ПҖ E 1 n //F 1 n . 18ALEX BLUMENTHAL To carry out our argument, we need to show thatT n expands vectors onE 1 n by a factor of approximatelye n О» , that|P 1 n |does not grow too quickly inn, and that|T n | F 1 n |is bounded from above by approximatelye nО» onF 1 n . Growth onE 1 n .LetvвҲҲE 1 n ,|v|= 1. Then, by Corollary 2.19, there is a constantC m depending only onmfor which V m (T n ) 2V 1 (T n ) mвҲ’1 вүӨ det(T n |E 1 n ) |T n | mвҲ’1 вүӨC m |T n v|.(3.7) Controlling|P 1 n |.Using (3.7) and the formula (2.1) for|P 1 n |in Lemma 2.4, we have that the projectionP 1 n :=ПҖ E 1 n //F 1 n satisfies |P 1 n |вүӨ|P 2 n |В·|T n |В·|(T n | E 1 n ) вҲ’1 |вүӨ вҲҡ mВ·|T n |В· 2C m |T n | mвҲ’1 V m (T n ) =C вҖІ m |T n | m V m (T n ) ,(3.8) whereC вҖІ m is again a constant depending only onm. Bounding|T n | F 1 n |.LetvвҲҲF 1 n ,|v|= 1. We will estimate|T n v|by estimating the growth rate of them+ 1-dimensional subspaceE 1 n вҠ•hviunderT n . TreatingE 1 n вҠ•hvias a splitting and using Lemma 2.15, we have that det(T n |E 1 n вҠ•hvi)вүҘC вҖІвҖІвҲ’1 m |P 2 n | E 2 n вҠ•hvi | вҲ’m В·det(T n |E 1 n )В·det(T n |hvi), and since det(T n |hvi) =|T n v|and det(T n |E 1 n вҠ•hvi)вүӨV m+1 (T n ), we obtain |T n v|вүӨ2 вҲҡ mC вҖІвҖІ m V m+1 (T n ) V m (T n ) ,(3.9) whereC вҖІвҖІ m again depends only onm. The RHS of (3.9) is approximatelye nО» fornlarge, as desired. Key to this approach to the MET is showing that the subspacesF 1 n converge in the Hausdorff distance at a sufficiently fast exponential rate. Claim 3.7.For anyОҙ >0, there existsNвҲҲNsuch that for anymвүҘnвүҘN, d H (F 1 n , F 1 m )вүӨe n(О» вҲ’О»+Оҙ) . Proof of Claim 3.7.FixОҙ >0. ForvвҲҲF 1 n ,|v|= 1, observe thatd(v, F 1 n+1 )вүӨ|P 1 n+1 v|, and that |(T n+1 | E 1 n+1 ) вҲ’1 | вҲ’1 В·|P 1 n+1 v|вүӨ|T n+1 P 1 n+1 v|вүӨ|P 2 n+1 |В·|T n в—ҰT n v| вүӨ|P 2 n+1 |В·|T n |В·|T n v|вүӨ|P 2 n+1 |В·|T n |В·|T n | F 1 n | вҮ’|P 1 n+1 |вүӨ|(T n+1 | E 1 n+1 ) вҲ’1 |В·|P 2 n+1 |В·|T n |В·|T n | F 1 n |(3.10) Since the bound on|P 1 n+1 v|holds over all unit vectorsvвҲҲF 1 n , we have shown the inequality Оҙ(F 1 n , F 1 n+1 )вүӨ вҲҡ mВ·|T n |В·|T n | F 1 n |В·|(T n+1 | E 1 n+1 ) вҲ’1 |, whereОҙrefers to the gap between subspaces; see Section 2.1.2. Using (3.7) and (3.9), and the hypothesis that lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log + |T n |= 0, observe that lim sup nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log ( вҲҡ mВ·|T n |В·|T n | F 1 n |В·|(T n+1 | E 1 n+1 ) вҲ’1 | ) (3.11) = 0 + lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log V m+1 (T n ) V m (T n ) + lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log |T n | mвҲ’1 V m (T n ) =О»вҲ’О». A VOLUME-BASED APPROACH TO THE MULTIPLICATIVE ERGODIC THEOREM ON BANACH SPACES 19 LetN 1 вҲҲNbe such that for anynвүҘN 1 , we have that the parenthetical quantity in (3.11) is less than or equal toe n(О» вҲ’О»+Оҙ) . LetN 2 вүҘN 1 be such thate n(О»вҲ’О»+Оҙ) вүӨ 1 2m ; applying Lemma 2.6, we obtainОҙ(F 1 n+1 , F 1 n )вүӨ2me n(О» вҲ’О»+Оҙ) , henced H (F 1 n , F 1 n+1 )вүӨ4me n(О» вҲ’О»+Оҙ) . The triangle inequality ford H now implies that for anymвүҘnвүҘN 2 , we have d H (F 1 n , F 1 m )вүӨ4m вҲһ вҲ‘ l=n e l(О» вҲ’О»+Оҙ) вүӨ ( 4m 1вҲ’e О» вҲ’О»+Оҙ ) e n(О» вҲ’О»+Оҙ) .(3.12) This implies Claim 3.7, on adjustingОҙto encapsulate the constant term in the parentheses on the RHS of (3.12). From Claim 3.7, it follows that{F 1 n } n вҠӮ G m (V 0 ) is Cauchy ind H .G m (V 0 ) is closed and (G(V 0 ), d H ) is complete (Proposition 2.5), and so{F 1 n }has a limitFвҲҲ G m (V 0 ). We now show thatF=F , henceFism-codimensional, by showing that vectors inFhave an asymptotic ex- ponential growth rate at mostО» , henceFвҠӮF, and that vectors inV 0 \\Fhave the exponential asymptotic growth rate О», henceFвҠӮF. Showinglim sup nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log|T n | F |вүӨО» .LetvвҲҲFbe a unit vector, and for eachn, letv n вҲҲF 1 n be a unit vector for which|vвҲ’v n |вүӨ2d H (F 1 n , F). Then, |T n v|вүӨ|T n (vвҲ’v n )|+|T n v n |вүӨ2|T n |В·d H (F 1 n , F) +|T n | F 1 n |. This yields lim sup nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log|T n | F |вүӨmax { lim sup nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log ( |T n |В·d H (F 1 n , F) ) ,lim sup nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log|T n | F 1 n | } = max{ О»+ (О»вҲ’О»), О»}=О». Showing that for anyvвҲҲV 0 \\F,lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log|T n v|= О».FixvвҲҲV 0 \\F. Without loss, assume |v|= 1, and letО·=d(v, F); sinceFis closed,О· >0. Letnbe large enough so thatd(v, F 1 n )вүҘО·/2, and observe that withv n =P 1 n v, we have|v n |вүҘd(v, F 1 n )вүҘО·/2. Therefore, |T n v|вүҘ|T n v n |вҲ’|T n (vвҲ’v n )|вүҘ|(T n | E 1 n ) вҲ’1 | вҲ’1 В·|v n |вҲ’|T n | F 1 n |В·|IвҲ’P 1 n | вүҘ О· 2 |(T n | E 1 n ) вҲ’1 | вҲ’1 вҲ’2|T n | F |В·|P 1 n |.(3.13) By (3.7), (3.8) and (3.9), the growth rate of the RHS of (3.13)is at least О», and so the growth rate of|T n v|is at least О». ForО·вҲҲ(0,1), that the growth on the coneC О· ={vвҲҲV 0 :d(v, F )вүҘО·|v|}is uniform, as in (3.3), is already apparent in the above proof. LetEвҠӮV 0 be a complement toF : we now check (3.4). Note that by Lemma 2.2, for any О·вҲҲ(0,|ПҖ E//F | вҲ’1 ), we haveEвҠӮC О· , and so by (3.3), it follows that lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log|(T n | E ) вҲ’1 |=вҲ’ О». Now, by Proposition 2.18,|(T n | E ) вҲ’1 | вҲ’m .det(T n |E).|T n | m : this yields (3.4). 3.2.3.Proof of Lemma 3.6.Here we will prove the induction step, Lemma 3.6. Throughout, we will assume thatTis a cocycle satisfying the hypotheses of Lemma 3.5. We will need the following Lemma, which says that a complementEtoF 2 (x) does not collapse too quickly ontoF 2 (x) under the action ofT n x . Lemma 3.8.LetxвҲҲО“, and letEвҠӮBbe a topological complement toF 2 (x). Then, lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log|ПҖ T n x E//T n x F 2 (x) |= 0.(3.14) 20ALEX BLUMENTHAL Proof of Lemma 3.8.Observe that |ПҖ T n x E//T n x F 2 (x) |=sup eвҲҲE,fвҲҲF 2 (x),|eвҲ’f|=1 |T n x e| |T n x (eвҲ’f)| вүӨsup eвҲҲE,fвҲҲF 2 (x),|eвҲ’f|=1 |T n x e| |T n x e|вҲ’|T n x f| . When|eвҲ’f|= 1, we have|e|вүӨ|ПҖ E//F 2 (x) |,|f|вүӨ1 +|ПҖ E//F 2 (x) |. Writep=|ПҖ E//F 2 (x) |. Then, |ПҖ T n x E//T n x F 2 (x) |вүӨ |T n x |В·p |(T n x | E ) вҲ’1 | вҲ’1 В·pвҲ’|T n x | F 2 (x) |В·(1 +p) ,(3.15) whereT n x | E is considered as a mapEвҶ’T n x E. Lemma 3.5 implies that lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log|(T n x | E ) вҲ’1 | вҲ’1 =О» 1 , sinceEвҠӮC О· (x) for anyО·вҲҲ(0,|ПҖ E//F |) (Lemma 2.2). Therefore, the numerator and denominator on the RHS of (3.15) both grow at the exponential rate О», which implies (3.14). Proof of Lemma 3.6.We will assume thatl m 1 +q >вҲ’вҲһ. The proof is similar otherwise, and we omit it. LetqвҲҲN. We will show separately that lim sup nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n logV q (T n x | F 2 (x) )вүӨl m 1 +q вҲ’l m 1 and that lim inf nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n logV q (T n x | F 2 (x) )вүҘl m 1 +q вҲ’l q . Lower bound onlim inf nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n logV q (T n x | F 2 (x) ).For eachn, letH n вҠӮBbe an (m 1 +q)-dimensional subspace for which det(T n x |H n )вүҘ 1 2 V m 1 +q (T n x ). Observe thatH n вҲ©F 2 (x) has dimensionвүҘq; let G n вҠӮH n вҲ©F 2 (x) be anyq-dimensional subspace. LetJ n be a complement toG n insideH n of dimensionm 1 for which|ПҖ G n //J n |вүӨ вҲҡ q(Lemma 2.3). Using Lemma 2.15, we now estimate: 1 2 V m 1 +q (T n x )вүӨdet(T n x |H n )вүӨC q |ПҖ G n //J n | q det(T n x |G n )В·det(T n x |J n )вүӨC вҖІ q V q (T n x | F 2 (x) )В·V m 1 (T n x ) for constantsC q , C вҖІ q depending onqalone, yielding lim inf nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n logV q (T n x | F 2 (x) )вүҘl m 1 +q вҲ’l m 1 .(3.16) Upper bound onlim sup nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n logV q (T n x | F 2 (x) ).For eachn, letG n вҠӮF 2 (x) be aq-dimensional subspace for which det(T n x |G n )вүҘ 1 2 V q (T n x | F 2 (x) ). Observe thatT n x G n is alwaysq-dimensional becauseV q (T n x | F 2 (x) )>0 for anyn, which follows from (3.16) and the assumptionl m 1 +q >вҲ’вҲһ. LetEвҠӮ Bbe any topological complement toF 2 (x), so that dim(EвҠ•G n ) =m 1 +qfor anyn. As|ПҖ T n x E//T n x G n |вүӨ|ПҖ T n x E//T n x F 2 (x) |, we obtain V m 1 +1 (T n x )вүҘdet(T n x |EвҠ•G n )вүҘC вҲ’1 m 1 |ПҖ T n x E//T n x F 2 (x) | вҲ’m 1 det(T n x |E) det(T n x |G n ) by Lemma 2.15, withC m 1 depending onm 1 alone. We conclude that l m 1 +q +m 1 lim sup nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log|ПҖ T n x E//T n x G n |вҲ’lim inf nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log det(T n x |E)вүҘlim sup nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n logV q (T n x | F 2 (x) ). The second term of the LHS equals zero by Lemma 3.8, and the liminf in the third term is a limit, equallingl m 1 by (3.6). 3.2.4.Proof of the Volume Growth Clause in Theorem 1.3.We finish the paper by proving (1.5) from Theorem 1.3. Lemma 3.9.For anyxвҲҲО“and for any Lyapunov exponentО» i+1 , iвүҘ1, ifEis any complement toF i+1 (x), then lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log det(T n x |E) = i вҲ‘ j=1 m j О» j .(3.17) A VOLUME-BASED APPROACH TO THE MULTIPLICATIVE ERGODIC THEOREM ON BANACH SPACES 21 Proof.The ideas for the proof are already present in the case whenEis a complement toF 3 (x) (that is,i= 2), and so we concentrate on that case. The first step is to find a splitting ofEof the formE=E 1 вҠ•E 2 , whereE 1 is a complement toF 2 (x) inBandE 2 вҠӮF 2 (x). We setE 2 :=F 2 (x)вҲ©E, and letE 1 be a complement toE 2 inE; it is not hard to check that becauseF 2 (x)вҠғF 3 (x) andB=EвҠ•F 3 (x), one has that dimE 2 = dimEвҲ’codimF 2 (x) =m 1 , so thatB=E 1 вҠ•F 2 (x) andF 2 (x) =E 2 вҠ•F 3 (x) hold. By (3.4) in Proposition 3.4, we know that forj= 1,2, lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log det(T n x |E j ) =m j О» j . We will now use the вҖҳblock determinantвҖҷ estimate of Lemma 2.15, after first checking that |ПҖ T n x E 1 //T n x E 2 |does not grow too quickly. ButT x F 2 (x)вҠӮF 2 (f x) holds for anyxвҲҲО“, and so ПҖ T n x E 1 //T n x E 2 =ПҖ T n x E 1 //F 2 (f n x) | T n x E . From there, it follows that lim nвҶ’вҲһ 1 n log|ПҖ T n x E 1 //T n x E 2 |= 0 by (3.14) in Lemma 3.8. Now, by Lemma 2.15, 1 C m 1 +m 2 |ПҖ T n x E 1 //T n x E 2 | m 1 вүӨ det(T n x |E 1 вҠ•E 2 ) det(T n x |E 1 )В·det(T n x |E 2 ) вүӨC m 1 +m 2 |ПҖ E 1 //E 2 | m 1 , whereC m 1 +m 2 depends onm 1 +m 2 alone; on taking logs and limits, this yields (3.17). Appendix A: Proof of Proposition 2.7 Here we record a proof of Proposition 2.7. Proposition 2.7.LetB=EвҠ•Fbe a topological splitting. For anyE вҖІ вҲҲ G(B)for which d H (E, E вҖІ )<|ПҖ E//F | вҲ’1 , we have thatB=E вҖІ вҠ•Fis a topological splitting. The projectionПҖ E вҖІ //F satisfies |ПҖ F//E вҖІ | E |вүӨ 2d(E, E вҖІ ) |ПҖ E//F | вҲ’1 вҲ’d(E, E вҖІ ) .(3.18) Proof.For simplicity we will writed(В·,В·) instead ofd H (В·,В·). To prove thatE вҖІ complementsF, we shall show all of the following: (1)E вҖІ вҲ©F={0}whend(E, E вҖІ )<|ПҖ E//F | вҲ’1 . (2) The (possibly proper) subspaceE вҖІ вҠ•Fis closed whend(E, E вҖІ )<|ПҖ E//F | вҲ’1 . (3) If the subspaceE вҖІ +Fis closed andd(E, E вҖІ )<1, thenE вҖІ +F=B. Item 1.SupposeE вҖІ вҲ©F6={0}. Then for anye вҖІ вҲҲE вҖІ вҲ©Fwith|e вҖІ |= 1, there existseвҲҲEwith |e|= 1 such that|eвҲ’e вҖІ |<|ПҖ E//F | вҲ’1 , hence 1 =|e|=|ПҖ E//F e|=|ПҖ E//F (eвҲ’e вҖІ )|вүӨ|ПҖ E//F |В·|eвҲ’e вҖІ |<1, which is a contradiction. Item 2.It will suffice to show that there existsa >0 such that for anye вҖІ вҲҲE вҖІ , fвҲҲF, we have |e вҖІ |вүӨa|e вҖІ +f|.(3.19) This is known as the Kober criterion \[14\]; for a more modern reference, see Chapter VII,В§3, Paragraph (4) of \[7\]. Indeed, if (3.19) holds andx n =e вҖІ n +f n is a Cauchy sequence, thene вҖІ n and f n are Cauchy, and thus converge to somee вҖІ вҲҲE вҖІ , fвҲҲFrespectively, by the closedness of each of E вҖІ , F, hence withx:=e вҖІ +fвҲҲE вҖІ +F, we havex n вҶ’x. We prove (3.19) directly: Lete вҖІ вҲҲE вҖІ andfвҲҲF. FixОұ >1 for whichОұd(E, E вҖІ )<|ПҖ E//F |, and leteвҲҲE,|e|=|e вҖІ |be such that|eвҲ’e вҖІ |вүӨ|e вҖІ |В·Оұd(E, E вҖІ ), so that |e вҖІ +f|вүҘ|e+f|вҲ’|eвҲ’e вҖІ |вүҘ|e вҖІ |(|ПҖ E//F | вҲ’1 вҲ’Оұd(E, E вҖІ )) =:a вҲ’1 |e вҖІ |>0. Item 3.Seeking a contradiction, assume thatE вҖІ вҠ•Fis a proper subspace ofB. FixОұ <1< ОІ such thatОІd(E, E вҖІ )< Оұ(which we can do, sinced(E, E вҖІ )<1). SinceE вҖІ вҠ•Fis closed (by Item 22ALEX BLUMENTHAL 2), the Riesz lemma (Lemma 4.7 ofВ§4.1 in \[24\]) asserts that there existsxвҲҲ Bwith|x|= 1 such that|xвҲ’(e вҖІ +f)| вүҘОұfor alle вҖІ вҲҲE вҖІ , fвҲҲF. On the other hand, sinceB=EвҠ•F, we have that x=e+ffor someeвҲҲE, fвҲҲF. Lete вҖІ вҲҲE вҖІ be such that|eвҲ’e вҖІ |вүӨОІd(E, E вҖІ ). Then |xвҲ’(e вҖІ +f)|=|eвҲ’e вҖІ |вүӨОІd(E, E вҖІ )< Оұ, which is a contradiction. We now prove (3.18). First, one can show directly from the Definition 2.1 of the minimal angle Оёthat sinОё(E вҖІ , F)вүҘsinОё(E, F)вҲ’d(E, E вҖІ ), whence |ПҖ E вҖІ //F |вүӨ ( |ПҖ E//F | вҲ’1 вҲ’d(E, E вҖІ ) ) вҲ’1 (3.20) by Lemma 2.2. Now, fixeвҲҲEandОұ >0. Lete вҖІ вҲҲE вҖІ ,|e вҖІ |= 1 for which|eвҲ’e вҖІ | вүӨОұВ·d(E, E вҖІ ). Using (3.20), we estimate |ПҖ F//E вҖІ e|=|ПҖ F//E вҖІ (eвҲ’e вҖІ )|вүӨ|ПҖ F//E |В·|eвҲ’e вҖІ |вүӨ2В· ( |ПҖ E//F | вҲ’1 вҲ’d(E, E вҖІ ) ) вҲ’1 В·d(E, E вҖІ ), which completes the proof. Appendix B: Measurability of slow-growing subspaces In this appendix, we formulate and prove a measurability result (Lemma 3.11 below) for slow- growing Oseledets subspaces. We note that a potential source of complication is that the Banach spaceBmay not be separable. The following notion of measurability is suitable for our purposes. Definition 3.10.Let (Y,H) be a measurable space and letZbe a metric space. We say that a mapping ОҰ :YвҶ’Zismeasurableif ОҰ is the pointwise limit of a sequence of finite-valued measurable maps ОҰ n :YвҶ’Z. The limit of a pointwise-convergent sequence of uniformly measurable mappings is itself uniformly measurable (see Chapter III,В§0 of \[6\]). In what follows, (X,F, Ој) is an ergodic mpt andT:XвҶ’L(B) is a linear cocycle obeying the hypotheses of Theorem 1.3; we write{О» i }for the Lyapunov exponents ofT. We consider the measurable space (О“,F| О“ ), where О“вҠӮXis defined in the proof of Theorem 1.3 andF| О“ denotes the restriction of the sigma algebraFto О“. We letCdenote the set of closed, bounded subsets ofB, which we regard as a metric space with the Hausdorff metricd H as defined in Section 2.1.2. We writeB 1 ={vвҲҲ B:|v| вүӨ1}for the unit ball ofB. Lemma 3.11.The mappingx7вҶ’B 1 вҲ©F О» i (x)is measurable as a map(О“,F| О“ )вҶ’C. Proof.We present the proof in the casei= 2; the general case is a straightforward adaptation of the same ideas, and is left to the reader. We use the following notation: forAвҲҲL(B) andc >0, we define S c (A) :={vвҲҲB 1 :|Av|вүӨc}. It is easy to show that forBвҲҲL(B), we haved H (S c (A),S c (B))вүӨc вҲ’1 |AвҲ’B|; in particular, if A n вҶ’Ais a convergent sequence of bounded operators in the uniformnorm, thenS c (A n )вҶ’S c (A) ind H . In light of (1.3) it follows thatx7вҶ’S c (T n x ) is measurable in the sense of Definition 3.10 for anynвүҘ1, c >0. To complete the proof, it suffices to show the following. Lemma 3.12.LetxвҲҲО“,ОҙвүӘО» 1 вҲ’О» 2 . Then, B 1 вҲ©F О» 2 (x) =d H - lim nвҶ’вҲһ S e n(О» 2 +Оҙ) (T n x ).(3.21) Here,d H - limdenotes a limit in the Hausdorff topology onC. A VOLUME-BASED APPROACH TO THE MULTIPLICATIVE ERGODIC THEOREM ON BANACH SPACES 23 Because the pointwise limit of measurable mappings is measurable, (3.21) implies thatx7вҶ’B 1 вҲ© F О» 2 (x) is measurable. It remains to prove Lemma 3.12. Proof of Lemma 3.12.LetEвҠӮ Bbe a complement toF О» 2 (x) for which|ПҖ F О» 2 (x)//E | вүӨ вҲҡ m 1 + 2 (where codimF О» 2 (x) =m 1 ; see Remark 3.3). By Proposition 3.4, we have the following forn sufficiently large: |T n x | F О» 2 (x) |вүӨe n(О» 2 +Оҙ) ,and(3.22) min vвҲҲE\\{0} |T n x v| |v| вүҘe n(О» 1 вҲ’Оҙ) .(3.23) We now prove (3.21). First, note that by (3.22), fornsufficiently large we have thatB 1 вҲ©F О» 2 (x)вҠӮ S e n(О» 2 +Оҙ) (T n x ). Trivially, then, we have that lim sup nвҶ’вҲһ sup vвҲҲB 1 вҲ©F О» 2 (x) d(v,S e n(О» 2 +Оҙ) (T n x )) = 0. Going the other direction, fixЗ« >0, and enlargenso that (3 + вҲҡ m 1 )e n(О» 2 вҲ’О» 1 +2Оҙ) < З«. Let wвҲҲ S e n(О» 2 +Оҙ) (T n x) and writew=e+f, eвҲҲE, fвҲҲF О» 2 (x). Note that|f| вүӨ( вҲҡ m 1 + 2), and so applying (3.22) and (3.23), e n(О» 1 вҲ’Оҙ) |e|вүӨ|T n x e|вүӨ|T n x w|+|T n x f|вүӨe n(О» 2 +Оҙ) + ( вҲҡ m 1 + 2)e n(О» 2 +Оҙ) = (3 + вҲҡ m 1 )e n(О» 2 +Оҙ) ; it follows that|e|вүӨЗ«, and so in fact we have the bound|f|вүӨ|w|+|e|вүӨ1 +З«. Thus, d(w, B 1 вҲ©F О» 2 (x))вүӨ|wвҲ’ 1 1 +З« f|вүӨ|wвҲ’f|+З«=|e|+З«вүӨ2З«; we have shown that lim sup nвҶ’вҲһ sup wвҲҲS e n(О» 2 +Оҙ) (T n x ) d(w, B 1 вҲ©F О» 2 (x))вүӨ2З« . TakingЗ«вҶ’0 completes the proof. References \[1\] RR Akhmerov, MI Kamenskii, AS Potapov, AE Rodkina, and BNSadovskii.Measures of noncompactness and condensing operators, volume 55 ofOperator theory: Advances and Ap- plications. Birkh МҲauser Basel, 1992. \[2\] Ludwig Arnold.Random dynamical systems. Springer, 1998. \[3\] Earl Berkson. Some metrics on the subspaces of a banach space.Pacific J. Math, 13:7вҖ“22, 1963. \[4\] Bela Bollobas.Linear analysis, an introductory course. Cambridge University Press, 1999. \[5\] Herbert Busemann. Intrinsic area.Annals of Mathematics, pages 234вҖ“267, 1947. \[6\] Charles Castaing and Michel Valadier.Convex analysis and measurable multifunctions, volume 580 ofLecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer, 2006. \[7\] Mahlon M. Day. Normed linear spaces. InNormed Linear Spaces, volume 21 ofErgebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete, pages 27вҖ“52. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1973. \[8\] Gerald B Folland.A course in abstract harmonic analysis. CRC press, 1994. \[9\] Gary Froyland, Simon Lloyd, and Anthony Quas. A semi-invertible oseledets theorem with applications to transfer operator cocycles.Discrete and Continuous Dynamical Systems, 33, 2013. \[10\] Cecilia Gonz МҒalez-Tokman and Anthony Quas. A semi-invertible operator oseledets theorem. Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems, 34(04):1230вҖ“1272, 2014. \[11\] Cecilia Gonz МҒalez-Tokman and Anthony Quas. A concise proof of the multiplicative ergodic theorem on banach spaces.Journal of Modern Dynamics, to appear. 24ALEX BLUMENTHAL \[12\] Einar Hille and Ralph Saul Phillips.Functional analysis and semi-groups. American Mathe- matical Soc., 1957. \[13\] Tosio Kato.Perturbation theory for linear operators. Springer, 1995. \[14\] H Kober. A theorem on banach spaces.Compositio Mathematica, 7:135вҖ“140, 1940. \[15\] Ulrich Krengel and Antoine Brunel.Ergodic theorems. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, 1985. \[16\] Zeng Lian and Kening Lu.Lyapunov exponents and invariant manifolds for random dynamical systems in a Banach space. American Mathematical Soc., 2010. \[17\] Richardo Ma Мғn МҒe. Lyapounov exponents and stable manifolds for compact transformations. In Geometric dynamics, pages 522вҖ“577. Springer, 1983. \[18\] Valery Iustinovich Oseledets. A multiplicative ergodic theorem. characteristic lyapunov expo- nents of dynamical systems.Trudy Moskovskogo Matematicheskogo Obshchestva, 19:179вҖ“210, 1968. \[19\] Albrecht Pietsch.Eigenvalues and s-numbers. Cambridge University Press Cambridge, 1987. \[20\] Madabusi S Raghunathan. A proof of oseledecs multiplicative ergodic theorem.Israel Journal of Mathematics, 32(4):356вҖ“362, 1979. \[21\] David Ruelle. Ergodic theory of differentiable dynamical systems.Publications Math МҒematiques de lвҖҷInstitut des Hautes МҒ Etudes Scientifiques, 50(1):27вҖ“58, 1979. \[22\] David Ruelle. Characteristic exponents and invariantmanifolds in hilbert space.Annals of Mathematics, 115(2):243вҖ“290, 1982. \[23\] Hanno Rund.The differential geometry of Finsler spaces. Springer, 1959. \[24\] Martin Schechter.Principles of functional analysis. American Mathematical Soc., 1973. \[25\] Bachel-Math Doan Thai Son.Lyapunov exponents for random dynamical systems. PhD thesis, Technische Universit МҲat Dresden, 2009. \[26\] Roger Temam.Infinite dimensonal dynamical systems in mechanics and physics. Springer, 1997. \[27\] Philippe Thieullen. Fibr МҒes dynamiques asymptotiquement compacts exposants de lyapounov. entropie. dimension. InAnnales de lвҖҷinstitut Henri Poincar МҒe (C) Analyse non lin МҒeaire, vol- ume 4, pages 49вҖ“97. Gauthier-Villars, 1987. \[28\] Peter Walters. A dynamical proof of the multiplicativeergodic theorem.Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 335(1):245вҖ“257, 1993. \[29\] P Wojtaszczyk.Banach Spaces for Analysts. Cambridge University Press, 1991. Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York, NY 10012, USA E-mail address, A. Blumenthal:alex@cims.nyu.edu