NOTES ON THE MULTIPLICATIVE ERGODIC THEOREM SIMION FILIP Abstract. The Oseledets Multiplicative Ergodic theorem is a basic result with numerous applications throughout dynamical sys- tems. These notes provide an introduction to this theorem, as well as subsequent generalizations. They are based on lectures at summer schools in Brazil, France, and Russia. Contents 1. Introduction2 2. Oseledets Multiplicative Ergodic Theorem4 2.1. Basic ergodic theory4 2.2. The Oseledets theorem5 2.3. Proof of the Oseledets theorem8 2.4. Proof of Lemma 2.3.110 2.5. Proof of Lemma 2.3.311 3. A geometric interpretation of the Oseledets theorem13 3.1. Basic constructions13 3.2. Structure theory of Lie groups15 3.3. Symmetric spaces17 3.4. Symmetric spaces and the Oseledets theorem20 3.5. Geometric form of the Oseledets theorem23 4. The general Noncommutative Ergodic Theorem25 4.1. Horofunctions25 4.2. Busemann functions27 4.3. Noncommutative Ergodic Theorem29 4.4. Proof of the Noncommutative Ergodic Theorem30 4.5. An example34 5. Mean versions of the Multiplicative Ergodic Theorem35 5.1.CAT(0)spaces35 5.2. Direct integrals ofCAT(0)spaces38 RevisedOctober 31, 2017. 1 arXiv:1710.10694v1 \[math.DS\] 29 Oct 2017 2SIMION FILIP 5.3. Mean Multiplicative Ergodic Theorem40 5.4. Mean Kingman theorem42 References44 1. Introduction The Oseledets multiplicative ergodic theorem is a basic result with applications throughout dynamical systems. It was first proved by Oseledets \[Ose68\], with previous work on random multiplication of matrices by Furstenberg and Furstenberg–Kesten \[FK60\]. In its basic form, it describes the asymptotic behavior of a product of matrices, sampled from a dynamical system. For instance, start with two fixedd×dmatricesAandBand flip a coin with two sidesntimes to obtain a random product of matrices of the formC n :=ABAABA... writingAfor heads andBfor tails (new matrices are added on the left of the sequence). The usual law of large numbers describes the frequency ofA’s andB’s, while its noncommutative version describes the resulting product matrix. The description is in terms of a collection of numbersλ 1 ≥···≥λ d called Lyapunov exponents, and a collection of (random) nested sub- spacesV ≤λ i ⊂R d called Lyapunov subspaces. Applying the (random) matrixC n to a vectorv∈V ≤λ i \\V ≤λ i+1 expands it by a factor of about e λ i ·n . Smooth Dynamics.One major motivation for a matrix version of the ergodic theorem was smooth dynamics. Starting from a diffeomorphism of a manifold, its induced action on the tangent bundle can be viewed as a collection of linear maps at each point of the manifold. Iterating the diffeomorphism, one studies the successive multiplication of the corresponding matrices along the orbit. Pesin theory \[Pes76,Pes77\] describes the local behavior of the iterates of the diffeomorphism in terms of the Lyapunov exponent and subspaces. The dimension of an invariant measure, the Lyapunov exponents, and the entropy of the diffeomorphism are related by the Ledrappier–Young formula \[LY85a, LY85b\]. Extensions.Ruelle \[Rue82\] extended the setting of the Oseledets the- orem to infinite dimensional Hilbert spaces. A geometric interpretation of the original theorem was later given by Kaimanovich \[Ka ̆ı87\], viewing a matrix as an isometry of a symmetric space. The statement of the NOTES ON MET3 Oseledets theorem became equivalent to one about divergence of points along a geodesic in the symmetric space. The work of Karlsson–Margulis \[KM99\] extended the scope of the theorem to isometries of non-positively curved metric spaces. The statement is again in terms of divergence of points along a geodesic. A subsequent extension by Karlsson–Ledrappier \[KL06\] includedall proper metric spaces. Divergence along a geodesic was replaced by linear divergence of the values of a horofunction. Finally, Gouëzel– Karlsson \[GK15\] extended the last result to include semi-contractions, and not just isometries of a metric space. Applications to Rigidity.One step in a proof of Margulis super- rigidity \[Mar74\] uses the Oseledets theorem. It views the collection Lyapunov subspaces as a point on a flag manifold, which is the bound- ary of a symmetric space. The Oseledets theorem then gives a boundary map, which is a starting point for many proofs of rigidity statements. This point of view is detailed in Zimmer’s work \[Zim84\]. Monod’s approach \[Mon06\] to rigidity in non-positive curvature is reversed in Section 5 to give a mean non-commutative ergodic theorem. Textbook treatments. A transparent discussion of the Oseledets the- orem with many applications is in the lecture notes of Ledrappier \[Led84\]. Some monographs which deal with this circle of questions are the ones by Katok–Hasselblatt \[KH95\], Mañé \[Mañ87\], Viana \[Via14\], and Zimmer \[Zim84\]. A treatment of the Oseledets theorem similar to the one in the present text appears in the notes of Bochi \[Boc\]. The notes of Karlsson \[Kar\] are another useful source, with many ideas there influencing the presentation here. Outline. Section 2 discusses the classical form of the Oseledets theorem. The presented proof is based on some geometric arguments and avoids the Kingman subadditive ergodic theorem. Section 3 contains a more geometric point of view on the Oseledets theorem, due to Kaimanovich \[Ka ̆ı87\]. It is formulated in terms of sequences of points tracking geodesics in symmetric spaces associated to Lie groups. Section 4 contains a very general non-commutative ergodic theorem that applies to isometries of general proper metric spaces. The linear divergence to infinity is now detected by a horofunction, rather than linear tracking of a geodesic. Section 5 discusses a mean version of non-commutative ergodic the- orems in non-positively curved metric spaces. The general notion of “direct integral” of metric spaces allows for a rather elementary treat- ment. 4SIMION FILIP 2. Oseledets Multiplicative Ergodic Theorem 2.1. Basic ergodic theory For a thorough introduction to ergodic theory, one can consult the monographs of Katok–Hasselblatt \[KH95\], Einsiedler–Ward \[EW11\], or Walters \[Wal75\]. 2.1.1. Notation. LetΩbe a separable, second-countable metric space, Bits Borelσ-algebra andμa probability measure onΩ. LetT: Ω→Ω be a measurable transformation, i.e. ifAis measurable thenT −1 (A)is also measurable. Define the push-forward measureT ∗ μby T ∗ μ(A) :=μ ( T −1 (A) ) whereA∈B. The measureμisT-invariant ifT ∗ μ=μand in this case(Ω,B,μ,T) is called a probability measure-preserving system. This will also be denoted below asTy(Ω,μ). 2.1.2. Ergodicity.By definition(Ω,B,μ,T)is ergodic if the only mea- surableT-invariant sets have either full or null measure. In other words, ifT −1 (A) =Athenμ(A) = 0or1. Equivalently, ifΩ =A ∐ Bis a T-invariant decomposition into measurable sets, thenμ(A) = 1or μ(B) = 1. Using the ergodic decomposition (\[EW11, Ch. 4.2\]) most questions can be reduced to ergodic systems. A starting point for many results is the Birkhoff, or Pointwise Ergodic Theorem. 2.1.3. Theorem(Birkhoff Pointwise Ergodic Theorem).AssumeTy (Ω,μ)is an ergodic probability measure-preserving system and letf∈ L 1 (Ω,μ)be an integrable function. Then forμ-a.e.ω∈Ωwe have lim N→∞ 1 N N−1 ∑ i=0 f(T i ω)→ ∫ Ω fdμ. The quantity on the right is the “space average” off, while the quantity on the left is the “time average”. 2.1.4. Remark.One can slightly relax theL 1 -integrability assumption above. Letf=f + +f − withf + ≥0andf − ≤0. Iff + ∈L 1 (Ω,μ), then the same conclusion in Theorem 2.1.3 holds, except that−∞is allowed as a limit. 2.1.5. Variant. Instead of additive averages, one can also consider multiplicative ones. With the notation as in the theorem, setg:= NOTES ON MET5 exp(f)(equivalently,f= logg). Then for a.e.ω∈Ωwe have lim N→∞ ( g(ω)g(Tω)···g(T N−1 ω) ) 1/N →exp ( ∫ Ω logg dμ ) 2.2. The Oseledets theorem 2.2.1. Example.Suppose thatMis a smooth manifold andF:M→ Mis a smooth diffeomorphism preserving a measureμ(for instance, a volume form). The diffeomorphism induces a map on the tangent bundle ofM; ifp∈Mis a point then D p F:T p M→T F(p) Mis a linear map. In analogy with the Birkhoff ergodic theorem, one can inquire about the asymptotic behavior of theN-fold composition D F N−1 (p) F◦···◦D p F:T p M→T F N (p) M An answer is given by the Oseledets Multiplicative Ergodic theorem. 2.2.2. Vector bundles.For(Ω,B,μ)consider vector bundlesV→Ω. By definition, this is a collection of setsU α which coverΩ, as well as gluing mapsφ α,β :U α ∩U β →GL n Rsatisfying the compatibility conditionφ γ,α ·φ β,γ ·φ α,β =1. The vector bundleVis then defined by gluing the piecesU α ×R n using the identifications: V:= ( ∐ α U α ×R n ) / (ω,v)∼(ω,φ α,β v)forω∈U α ∩U β The setsU α can be measurable or open. Similarly, the gluing maps can be measurable, continuous, smooth, depending on the qualities ofΩ. Any vector bundle can be measurably trivialized, i.e. it is measurably isomorphic toΩ×R n . However, intrinsic notation will be more useful in the sequel. Forω∈Ωusing it as subscript, e.g.V ω , will denote the fiber ofVoverω. 2.2.3. Cocycles.LetT: Ω→Ωbe a probability measure preserving transformation, andV→Ωa vector bundle. ThenVis acocycleover Tif the action ofTlifts toVby linear transformations. In other words, there are linear maps T ω :V ω →V Tω and these maps vary measurably, continuously, or smoothly withω. For simplicity, assume thatT ω is alwaysinvertible. 6SIMION FILIP 2.2.4. Oseledets Multiplicative Ergodic Theorem.To motivate the next result, consider a single matrixAacting onR n , say with positive eigenvaluese λ 1 > e λ 2 >···> e λ k (perhaps with multiplicities). For a vectorv∈R n , consider the behavior of ∥ ∥ ∥A N v ∥ ∥ ∥ asNgets large. For typicalv, this will grow at ratee N·λ 1 . But forvcontained in the span of eigenvectors with eigenvaluese λ 2 or less, the growth rate of ∥ ∥ ∥A N v ∥ ∥ ∥ will be different. Repeating the analysis gives a filtration ofR n by subspaces with different order of growth under iteration ofA. 2.2.5. Remark.Throughout these notes, a metric on a vector space or vector bundle will mean a symmetric, possitive-definite bilinear form. In other words, it is a positive-definite inner product. The next result is a generalization of the Birkhoff theorem to cocycles over general vector bundles. 2.2.6. Theorem (Oseledets Multiplicative Ergodic Theorem).Sup- poseV→(Ω,B,μ,T)is a cocycle over an ergodic probability measure- preserving system. Assume thatVis equipped with a metric‖−‖on each fiber such that ∫ Ω log + ‖T ω ‖ op dμ(ω)<∞(2.2.7) Herelog + (x) :=max(0,logx)and‖−‖ op denotes the operator norm of a linear map between normed vector spaces. Then there exist real numbersλ 1 > λ 2 >···> λ k (with perhaps λ k =−∞) andT-invariant subbundles ofVdefined for a.e.ω∈Ω: 0(V ≤λ k (···(V ≤λ 1 =V such that for vectorsv∈V ≤λ i ω \\V ≤λ i+1 ω we have lim N→∞ 1 N log ∥ ∥ ∥T N v ∥ ∥ ∥→λ i (2.2.8) 2.2.9. Remark. (i) The invariance of the subbundlesV ≤λ i means thatT ω :V ω → V Tω takesV ≤λ i ω →V ≤λ i Tω . The filtrationV ≤λ • will be called theforward Oseledets filtration. The numbers{λ i }are called Lyapunov exponents. (ii)The multiplicity of an exponentλ i is defined to bedimV ≤λ i − dimV ≤λ i+1 . Later it will be convenient to list exponents re- peating them with their appropriate multiplicity. (iii) The Oseledets filtration and exponents arecanonical, since they are defined by the property in Eqn. (2.2.8). If we have an exact sequence of bundlesV→W→W/Vthen the exponents of NOTES ON MET7 Ware the union of those inVandW/V. To see this, one can apply successively Lemma 2.3.3 below to the filtration onW coming from the Oseledets filtrations onVandW/V(a similar construction will appear in the proof of the Oseledets theorem below). 2.2.10. Variant.Suppose now thatT: Ω→Ωis aninvertiblemap, and the cocycle onVfor the mapT −1 satisfies the same assumptions as in the Oseledets Theorem 2.2.6. Applying the result to the inverse operator gives a set ofk ′ exponentsη j and thebackwardsOseledets filtrationV ≤η j . By construction ifv∈V ≤η j \\V ≤η j+1 then lim N→∞ 1 N log ∥ ∥ ∥T −N v ∥ ∥ ∥→η j The only way for this to be compatible with the forward behavior of the vectors is ifη j =−λ k+1−j andk ′ =k. Moreover, defining V λ j :=V ≤λ j ∩V ≤η k+1−j gives aT-invariant direct sum decomposition V=V λ 1 ⊕···⊕V λ k The defining dynamical property of this decomposition is that 06=v∈V λ i ⇔lim N→±∞ 1 N log ∥ ∥ ∥T N v ∥ ∥ ∥=λ i Note that whenNgoes to−∞, the sign in the 1 N factor changes. 2.2.11. Remark.Suppose that the vector bundleVis1-dimensional. The Oseledets theorem is then equivalent to the Birkhoff theorem. To see this, define f(ω) := log ‖T ω v‖ ‖v‖ which is independent of the choice of06=v∈V ω . The integrability condition on the cocycle from Eqn. (2.2.7) is equivalent to the integrability off + :=max(0,f)∈L 1 (Ω,μ). Then the Birkhoff theorem gives 1 N ( f(ω) +···+f(T N−1 ω) ) = 1 N log ∥ ∥ ∥T N v ∥ ∥ ∥ ‖v‖ → ∫ Ω fdμ It follows that 1 N log ∥ ∥ ∥T N v ∥ ∥ ∥→ ∫ Ω fdμ=λ 1 Conversely, givenf∈L 1 (Ω,μ), defineT: Ω×R→Ω×Rby T(ω,v) = (Tω,exp(f(ω))·v) and use the standard norm onRto deduce the Birkhoff theorem. 8SIMION FILIP 2.3. Proof of the Oseledets theorem The proof of the Oseledets Theorem 2.2.6 in this section will involve two preliminary results, stated below as Lemma 2.3.1 and Lemma 2.3.3. These will be proved in separate sections below. The setup and notation is from Theorem 2.2.6 above. 2.3.1. Lemma(Reducibility or growth dichotomy).At least one, but perhaps both, of the following possibilities occur. (i)There existsλ∈Rsuch that for a.e.ω∈Ωand for all nonzero v∈V ω lim N→∞ 1 N log ∥ ∥ ∥T N v ∥ ∥ ∥→λ and the limit is uniform over allvwith‖v‖= 1, and fixedω. (ii) There exists a nontrivial properT-invariant subbundleE(V which is defined atμ-a.e.ω. In other words, either there is a nontrivial subbundle with0<dimE < dimV , or vectors inVexhibit growth with just one Lyapunov exponent. I am grateful to the referee for pointing out that ideas similar to the ones used in the proof of the above lemma also appear in the article of Walters \[Wal93\]. 2.3.2. Remark. SupposeVis a cocycle overΩsuch that Eqn. (2.2.7) holds. Suppose further thatE⊂Vis an a.e. definedT-invariant subbundle. Then the same boundedness condition(2.2.7)holds for the bundlesEandV/E, equipped with the natural norms. In typical situations, one expects generic vectors to grow at maximal possible speed. The lemma below shows that if maximal growth occurs in a proper subbundle, then the corresponding piece must split off as a direct summand. 2.3.3. Lemma(Unusual growth implies splitting).Consider a short exact sequence of cocycles overΩ 0→E ↪→V p −→F→0 Assume there existλ E ,λ F ∈Rsuch that for a.e.ω∈Ω ∀e∈(E ω \\0)we have 1 N log ∥ ∥ ∥T N e ∥ ∥ ∥→λ E ∀f∈(F ω \\0)we have 1 N log ∥ ∥ ∥T N f ∥ ∥ ∥→λ F (2.3.4) and the limits are uniform over‖e‖= 1,‖f‖= 1and fixedω. NOTES ON MET9 Ifλ E > λ F then the sequence is split, i.e. there exists a linear map σ:F→Vsuch thatV=E⊕σ(F)andp◦σ=1 F (2.3.5) and this decomposition ofVisT-invariant. The exponentλ F is allowed to be−∞. I am grateful to the referee for pointing out that a similar idea appears in Mañe’s treatment of the Oseledets theorem \[Mañ87, Lemma 11.6\]. 2.3.6. Remark. (i) The splitting constructed in Lemma 2.3.3 will betempered, i.e. lim N→∞ 1 N log ∥ ∥ ∥σ(T N v) ∥ ∥ ∥ ‖T N v‖ = 0 The Lyapunov exponent ofFandσ(F)will thus be the same. (ii)In general, one expects that the maximal Lyapunov exponent on a subbundle should be less than the one on the entire bundle. What Lemma 2.3.3 says is that if this is not the case, then the cocycle must be a direct sum. Proof of Theorem 2.2.6.Proceed by induction on the dimension of the cocycleV. The base case of line bundles follows from the Birkhoff ergodic theorem, as explained in Remark 2.2.11. Suppose now that the statement holds for all cocycles of dimension at mostn−1and thatV isn-dimensional. Lemma 2.3.1 implies that either the statement holds onVwith a single exponentλ 1 , or there exists a properT-invariant subbundleE⊂V. Among all such possibleE, pick one that has minimal codimension. Then applying Lemma 2.3.1 again toV/Eit follows that all vectors inV/Egrow at the same rateλ ′ . Applying the inductive assumption toEgives exponentsλ 1 >···> λ k and subbundlesE ≤λ i with the required properties. Note thatE ≤λ i are also naturally subbundles inV. Ifλ 1 ≤λ ′ then we are done. Otherwise, apply Lemma 2.3.3 to the sequence 0→E/E ≤λ 2 ↪→V/E ≤λ 2 V/E→0 to obtain a splitting mapσ:V/E→V/E ≤λ 2 . Then the preimage ofσ(V/E)under the projectionV→V/E ≤λ 2 gives us a subbundle denotedV ≤λ 2 with the following two properties. First, any vector outsideV ≤λ 2 will grow at rateλ 1 . Second,V ≤λ 2 maps naturally to V/E(which has exponentλ ′ ). Apply iteratively Lemma 2.3.3 toV ≤λ i (starting now withV ≤λ 2 ) to construct the Oseledets filtration as above, repeating the process until λ i ≤λ ′ . 10SIMION FILIP 2.4. Proof of Lemma 2.3.1 Consider the bundleV→Ωand the associated projective space bundle P(V) π −→Ω. Since the transformationTacts onVby linear maps, its action extends toP(V)by projective-linear transformations. Define the space of probability measures onP(V)which project to the measureμonΩ: M 1 (P(V),μ) :={ηprob. measure onP(V)withπ ∗ η=μ}(2.4.1) SinceμisT-invariant, the action ofTonP(V)naturally extends to an action onM 1 (P(V),μ). A weak-\* topology onM 1 (P(V,μ))is described in \[Via14, § 4.2.3\] using duality with measurable functions on the total space, which are continuous onμ-a.e. fiber. A related discussion can be found in \[Boc, § 4\]. 2.4.2. Exercise. (i)Krylov–Bogoliubov.LetS: Ω→Ωbe a homeomorphism of a compact separable metric space. Prove that the space of probability measures onΩis weak-\* and sequentially compact, and that it has anS-invariant measure. (ii)Krylov–Bogoliubov in families. Prove that the space of probability measuresM 1 (P(V),μ)(see(2.4.1)) is weak-\* and sequentially compact, and that it has at least oneT-invariant measure. Define now the functionf:P(V)→Rby f(\[v\]) := log ( ‖Tv‖ ‖v‖ ) Integrating againstf(−)gives a continuous function on the space of measures: ∫ f:M 1 (P(V),μ)→R η7→ ∫ P(V) fdη (2.4.3) The set ofT-invariant measures, denotedM 1 (P(V),μ) T is non-empty and weak-\* compact, so this function achieves a minimum on it. More- over, the set of measures on which the minimum is achieved is a closed convex subset. Therefore, an extremal point of this convex set exists. This is a measureη∈ M 1 (P(V),μ)which is also ergodic for theT- action onP(V); ergodicity follows by the choice ofηas an extreme point in the minimizing convex set. NOTES ON MET11 Applying the Birkhoff ergodic theorem to the functionfand the measureη, it follows that forη-a.e.\[v\]∈P(V) 1 N ( f(\[v\]) +···+f(T N−1 \[v\]) ) = 1 N log   ∥ ∥ ∥T N v ∥ ∥ ∥ ‖v‖   → ∫ P(V) fdη=:λ (2.4.4) In each fiberP(V ω )⊂P(V)consider the setMof vectors for which the above limit holds. This is aT-invariant set, and forμ-a.e.ωthis set is non-empty. Moreover, the fiberwise span of the\[v\]∈Mgives a T-invariant subbundleE⊂V. If this is a proper subbundle, then we are in case (ii) of Lemma 2.3.1. Suppose therefore thatE=V. In this case, any vector inVcan be written as a linear combination of vectors with asymptotic norm growth rateλ. Thus, their asymptotic growth rate is at mostλ. In fact, by choice ofλtheir asymptotic growth rate has to be exactlyλ, uniformly in\[v\]in a fixed fiber. To see this, suppose by contradiction that there exists aμ-generic ω(i.e. the forward orbit ofωweak-\* approachesμ), an >0and a sequence\[v i \]∈P(V ω )such that lim sup N i →∞ 1 N i log( ∥ ∥ ∥T N i v i ∥ ∥ ∥)≤λ−(2.4.5) where‖v i ‖= 1andN i is some sequence tending to+∞. Consider now probability measures onP(V)given by normalizedδ- masses on the orbits of lengthN i of\[v i \], call themη i . Letη  be one of their weak-\* limits: it isT-invariant by construction and projects toμ sinceωisμ-generic. However, from Eqn. (2.4.5) we see thatlim sup ∫ P(V) f dη i ≤λ−(see Eqn. (2.4.4) for the relation between orbit sum and function evaluation). It follows that also ∫ P(V) f dη  ≤λ−which contradicts the definition ofλ. 2.4.6. Remark.The proof of Lemma 2.3.1 shows that the filtration constructed will, in fact, give the correct sequence of Lyapunov expo- nents. However, Lemma 2.3.3 might be of intrinsic interest. 2.5. Proof of Lemma 2.3.3 The setup is a short exact sequence of vector bundles 0→E→V p −→F→0 12SIMION FILIP Pick any liftσ 0 :F→Vsuch thatV=E⊕σ 0 (F). For instance, since Vhas a metric, there is a natural identificationF ∼ −→E ⊥ ⊂V. The cocycle mapTnow takes the form T= \[ T E U 0T F \] with the following linear maps T E,ω :E ω →E Tω T F,ω :F ω →F Tω U ω :F ω →E Tω (2.5.1) Any other possible liftσ:F→Vdiffers fromσ 0 by a mapτ:F→ E . Indeed, the differenceτ=σ−σ 0 is a mapF→Vwhich after composition back with the projectionp:V→Fis the zero map. Thereforeτhas image inE, and can be regarded as a mapτ:F→E. The condition thatσ=σ 0 +τis a splitting that diagonalizesTis explicit. Work in the decompositionV=E⊕σ 0 (F). Then a vector \[ e f \] is inσ(F)if and only ife=τ(f). But applyingTgives T \[ τ(f) f \] = \[ T E,ω ◦τ ω (f) +U ω (f) T F,ω (f) \] ∈V Tω (2.5.2) The condition that this vector is inσ Tω (F)becomes T E,ω ◦τ ω (f) +U ω (f) =τ Tω ◦T F,ω (f). Note that this is an equality of maps fromF ω toE Tω . The equation can be equivalently rewritten τ ω =T −1 E,ω ◦τ Tω ◦T F,ω −T −1 E,ω ◦U ω (2.5.3) A formal solution of this equation is given by τ ω =− ∞ ∑ n=0 (T n+1 E,ω ) −1 ◦U T n ω ◦T n F,ω (2.5.4) which uses the linear operators corresponding to iterating the mapsn times: T n F,ω :F ω →F T n ω U T n ω :F T n ω →E T n+1 ω (T n+1 E,ω ) −1 :E T n+1 ω →E ω (2.5.5) However, recall the assumptionλ E > λ F , or equivalentlyλ F −λ E <0. Each vector inEandFrespectively grows exponentially at rateλ E andλ F respectively. NOTES ON MET13 Therefore, the formal sum in Eqn. (2.5.4) for a.e.ωconverges uni- formly and gives the desired linear map. For this, first note that the Birkhoff theorem gives forμ-a.e.ω ‖U T n ω ‖ op =e o(n) (2.5.6) sincelog + ‖U‖ op is inL 1 . Hence for a vectorv∈F ω the expression τ ω vis an infinite sum with each term bounded by an exponentially convergent series. For this, use that ∀v 1 ∈E ω we have ∥ ∥ ∥T n+1 E,ω v 1 ∥ ∥ ∥=e nλ E +o(n) ·‖v 1 ‖ and hence ∀v 2 ∈E T n+1 ω we have ∥ ∥ ∥(T n+1 E,ω ) −1 v 2 ∥ ∥ ∥=e −nλ E +o(n) ·‖v 2 ‖ Hence for a.e.ωand for a basis ofF ω applyingτ ω is well-defined and converges uniformly. 3. A geometric interpretation of the Oseledets theorem The point of view on the Oseledets theorem developed in this section goes back at least to Kaimanovich \[Ka ̆ı87\]. The work of Karlsson and Margulis \[KM99\] provides a link between the point of view in this and the next sections. 3.1. Basic constructions 3.1.1. Standard operations of linear algebra. Starting with a col- lection of vector bundles, standard linear algebra operations produce new ones. This applies in particular to cocycles over dynamical systems. Suppose thatLandNare two cocycles over the mapT: (Ω,μ)→ (Ω,μ), with Lyapunov exponentsλ 1 ≥ ···λ l andη 1 ≥ ··· ≥η n . The Lyapunov exponents are listed with multiplicities, and this will be the convention from now on. Here is a list of constructions and corresponding Lyapunov exponents: L⊗N:Exponents are{λ i +η j }withi= 1...l,j= 1...n. L ∨ (dual): Exponents are{−λ i }withi= 1...l. Hom(L,N): Exponents are{η j −λ i }withi= 1...l,j= 1...n. Λ k (L):Exponents are{λ i 1 +···+λ i k }withi 1 <···< i k . The Oseledets filtrations of the new cocycles can also be explicitly described in terms of those for the cocyclesLandN. 14SIMION FILIP 3.1.2. Volume-preserving diffeomorphisms.Suppose thatF:M→ M is a diffeomorphism of a manifold which preserves a measure given by a volume formμ. Thusμis a section of the top exterior power of the tangent bundle ofM, denotedΛ n (TM). Becauseμis preserved by Tthe Lyapunov exponent ofΛ n (TM)is zero. On the other hand, by the preceding discussion the exponent ofΛ n (TM)is also the sum of the Lyapunov exponents on the tangent bundleTM. 3.1.3. Symplectic cocycles. Suppose the rank2gvector bundleV→ Ωcarries a symplectic pairing denoted〈−,−〉which is preserved by the linear mapsT ω . Then the Lyapunov exponents ofVhave the symmetry λ 1 ≥···≥λ g ≥−λ g ≥···≥−λ 1 In fact, ifV ≤λ i denotes the forward Oseledets filtration, then the sym- plectic orthogonal ofV ≤λ i+1 isV ≤−λ i . For the symmetry of the Lyapunov spectrum, it suffices to note that the symplectic form gives an isomorphism of the cocycleVand its dual cocycleV ∨ . The exponents ofV ∨ are the negatives of that forV, so the claim follows. The same construction gives the claim about filtrations. The isomor- phism given by the symplectic form respects the Oseledets filtrations onVandV ∨ . On the other hand, the Oseledets filtration onV ∨ can be described in the general case as the dual, via annihilators, of the Oseledets filtration onV. 3.1.4. Remark. (i)Consider a matrix in the symplectic groupA∈Sp 2g (R). Sup- pose thate λ is an eigenvalue ofA. Thene −λ is also an eigen- value ofA, and this can be seen by considering the symmetry of the characteristic polynomial ofA. This is a different explana- tion for the symmetry of the Lyapunov spectrum of symplectic cocycles. (ii)There are some other symmetries the cocycle might have. If it preserves a symmetric bilinear form of signature(p,q)with p≥q, then the spectrum has the form λ 1 ≥···≥λ q ≥0···≥0≥−λ q ≥···≥−λ 1 In particular, there are at leastp−qzero exponents. (iii) The Oseledets theorem holds for both real and complex vector bundles (with hermitian metrics). The Lyapunov exponents are real numbers in both cases. NOTES ON MET15 3.2. Structure theory of Lie groups 3.2.1. Setup. Throughout this sectionGwill be a real semisimple Lie group with Lie algebrag. Fix a maximal compact subgroupK⊂G with Lie algebrak. ThenGcan be equipped with aCartan involution σ:G→Gwhose action onggives the decomposition into eigenspaces g=k⊕pwhereσ| k = +1andσ| p =−1 Recall also theKilling formonggiven by〈x,y〉=tr(ad x ◦ad y ). It is negative-definite onkand positive-definite onp. 3.2.2. Example ofSL n R.Consider g=sl n R={a∈Mat n×n R|tra= 0}. A maximal compact subgroup isK=SO n Rwith Lie algebraso n R. The involutionσacts onSL n Rbyg7→(g −1 ) t and ongbyx7→ −x t . The subspacepon whichσacts by−1is the space of symmetric matrices: p={x∈sl n R|x=x t } 3.2.3. Remark.In fact, any real semisimple Lie algebragadmits an embeddingg↪→sl n Rsuch that the Cartan involution ongis that of sl n Rrestricted tog. In this casek=g∩so n Rand similarly forp. 3.2.4. Split maximal Cartan algebra and Polar Decomposition. Pick a maximal abelian subalgebraa⊂g. By definition, any two elements ofacommute, andais maximal with this property. This is called asplit Cartan subalgebra. It carries an action of a reflection group whose description is omitted. The reflection hyperplanes divide ainto chambers; fix one sucha + ⊂a , called a Weyl chamber. Using the exponential map,agives the Lie subgroupA⊂G; the chambera + determines a semigroupA + ⊂A. The polar (or Iwasawa, orKAK) decomposition of an elementg∈G describes it as a product g=k 1 ak 2 wherek i ∈Kanda∈A + . In other wordsG=KA + K. The decomposition of an element is typically, though not always, unique. 3.2.5. The example ofSL n R. The spectral theorem says that a symmetricn×nmatrixMhas a basis of orthogonal eigenvectors. Thus 16SIMION FILIP Mis conjugate to a diagonal matrix via an orthogonal transformation: M=k·d·k t wherek∈SO n Randdis diagonal. Because permutation matrices are orthogonal, one can assume the entries ofdare in increasing order. Let nowg∈SL n Rand consider the elementsgg t andg t g. Both of them are symmetric, so the spectral theorem gives gg t =k 1 d 1 k t 1 g t g=k 2 d 2 k t 2 One can check thatd 1 =d 2 =dand then thatg=k 1 √ dk 2 . One can take the entries of √ dto be positive, at the expense of adjusting the signs ofk 1 andk 2 . A maximal split Cartan subalgebra forsl n Ris given by diagonal matrices a={a= diag(λ 1 ,...,λ n )|λ 1 +...+λ n = 0} A Weyl chamber is given by a + ={a= diag(λ 1 ,...,λ n )∈a|λ 1 ≥···≥λ n } 3.2.6. Singular values.More intrinsically, suppose thatT:V→W is a linear map, and each ofVandWis equipped with a metric. The superscript(−) † denotes the adjoint of an operator. Consider the symmetric self-adjoint linear operatorT † T:V→V. By the spectral theorem, it can be diagonalized with positive eigenvalues σ 1 (T) 2 ≥···≥σ n (T) 2 These are called thesingular valuesofT. The top singular value also computes the operator norm ofT: σ 1 (T) =‖T‖ op := sup 06=v∈V ‖Tv‖ ‖v‖ (3.2.7) Moreover, one has the induced operators on exterior powersΛ k T : Λ k V→Λ k W. Then the singular values ofΛ k Tcan be expressed in terms of those ofT, for example the largest one is given by σ 1 (Λ k T) =σ 1 (T)···σ k (T) In particular, the operator norm ofΛ k T gives the product of the first ksingular values. NOTES ON MET17 3.3. Symmetric spaces 3.3.1. Setup. Consider the quotientX:=G/K, equipped with a left G-action. At the distinguished basepointe=1K, the tangent space is canonically identified withp. Here are some properties of the quotient: (i)It admits a canonicalG-invariant metric, coming from the restriction of the Killing form top. (ii)The spaceXis diffeomorphic top. The exponential mapexp: p→G→G/Kexhibits the diffeomorphism. (iii) The canonical metric has non-positive sectional curvature. At the basepoint, in the direction of normalized vectorsx,y∈p, it involves the commutator ofxandyand is given by K(x,y) =− 1 2 ‖\[x,y\]‖ 2 In particular, ifxandycommute, the curvature is0. The abelian subalgebraadetermines, via the exponential map, a totally geodesic embedding ofa(with Euclidean metric) into X. 3.3.2. The example ofSL 2 R.Recall that the hyperbolic plane can be described as a quotientH=SL 2 R/SO 2 R. The canonical symmetric space metric will in this case be the hyperbolic metric. 3.3.3. Remark.The action ofGonXis transitive, i.e. for any x,y∈Xthere is ag∈Gsuch thatgx=y. This action also preserves distances. In the hyperbolic planeH, for anyx 1 ,x 2 andy 1 ,y 2 such thatd(x 1 ,x 2 ) = d(y 1 ,y 2 ), there is a transformationg∈Gsuch thatgx i =y i . However, for a generalXthe action does not act transitively on pairs of points at the same distance. The number of parameters that needs to be “matched” is equal to the dimension ofa. In the case ofSL 2 R, this dimension is1and the parameter corresponds to distance. 3.3.4. Geodesics inX.Given a pointx∈X=G/K, using the decompositionG=KAKit follows thatx=k x a x e, wherek x ∈Kis to be thought of as a “direction” anda x as a “distance”. All geodesic rays inXstarting at the basepointecan be parametrized by γ(t) =kexp(t·α)ewherek∈K,α∈a + The geodesic ray is unit speed if‖α‖ 2 = 1. Note that ifαis on a wall of the Weyl chamber (forsl n R, this means some eigenvalues coincide) 18SIMION FILIP then differentk∈Kcan give the same geodesic. This is also the way in which theKAKdecomposition can fail to be unique. 3.3.5. Cartan projection. Forx∈Xletr(x)∈a + denote the unique element such thatkexp(r(x))e=xfor somek∈K. Althoughkmight not be unique, the elementr(x)is. It can be viewed as a “generalized radius” (in the literature, also called a Cartan projection). Its norm in ais equal to the Riemannian distance frometox. For example, start with a matrixg∈G=GL n R, with maximal compactK= O n (R)and split Cartan the diagonal matricesa⊂gl n R. Consider the pointg∈G/Kobtained by applyinggto the basepoint e∈G/K. Then the Cartan projectionr(g)∈a + is the diagonal matrix withi th entrylog(σ i (g)) (the singular valuesσ i are defined in §3.2.6). 3.3.6. Regularity.A sequence of points{x n }inXisregularif there exists a geodesic rayγ: \[0,∞)→Xandθ≥0such that d(x n ,γ(θ·n)) =o(n) In other words the quantity 1 n d(x n ,γ(θ·n))tends to zero. 3.3.7. Remark. (i) If the parameterθis zero, the sequence satisfiesd(x n ,e) =o(n). Recall thate∈Xis the distinguished basepoint. (ii)A sequenceg n ∈Gisregularif the sequence of points{g n e}is regular. 3.3.8. Kaimanovich’s characterization of regularity.The regu- larity of a sequence in a symmetric spaceXcan be characterized by rather simple conditions. The non-positive curvature assumption is crucial for this description to hold, and in other metric spaces such characterizations are not known. 3.3.9. Theorem(Kaimanovich \[Ka ̆ı87\]).A sequence of points{x n } inX=G/Kis regular if and only if the following two conditions are satisfied: Small steps:d(x n ,x n+1 ) =o(n) Distances converge:α:= lim r(x n ) n exists ina + . A precursor to this result is due to Ruelle \[Rue79, Prop. 1.3\], where it is phrased in terms of matrices. 3.3.10. Remark. NOTES ON MET19 (i)Recall that there exists a sequence of points{x n } ⊂R 2 with d(x n ,x n+1 ) =O(n),lim |x n | n exists, but the angles ofx n to the origin don’t converge. One can take the points to be on a logarithmic spiral. This example is in the “zero curvature” case. Totally geodesic embeddings ofR d intoG/Karise using the exponential map ina, and for this reason the convergence of the vector-valued distance ina + is necessary in Theorem 3.3.9. (ii)It is instructive to verify Theorem 3.3.9 in the case whenXis a tree, andr(x)is simply the distance to a fixed basepoint. Proof of Theorem 3.3.9.For simplicity, consider the case of the hyper- bolic planeH=SL 2 R/SO 2 R, equipped with the metric of constant negative curvature. This case contains the main idea and is easier notationally. First, recall the Law of Sines in constant negative curvature. Consider a triangle with angles of sizesα,β,γand opposite sides of lengthsa,b,c. These quantities are related by (3.3.11) sinα sinha = sinβ sinhb = sinγ sinhc Thereforesinα= sinβ· sinha sinhb . Recall that we have the estimates d(x n ,x n+1 ) =o(n) d(e,x n ) =θn+o(n) Assume thatθ >0, otherwise the claim follows directly. Define the angle, when viewed from the origin, between successive points:φ n :=\](x n ex n+1 ). Define also the angleβ n+1 :=\](x n x n+1 e). The law of sines then gives sinφ n = sinβ n+1 · sinh(d(x n ,x n+1 )) sinh(d(e,x n+1 )) Applying the bounds 1 10 |x| ≤ |sinx| (for|x| ≤π/10) and|sinx| ≤1toφ n andβ n+1 respectively, combined with the assumed bounds on distance, yields |φ n |≤10· sinh(d(x n ,x n+1 )) sinh(d(e,x n+1 )) ≤ e o(n) e θn+o(n) ≤e −θn+o(n) Therefore, the total angleφ:= ∑ n≥0 φ n converges uniformly. The geodesic 20SIMION FILIP launched at angleφand speedθwill beo(n)-close tox n (again, by an application of the law of sines). 3.3.12. Remark. (i)To generalize the above proof to all symmetric spacesX= G/K, one needs two further ingredients. The first is a com- parison theorem for triangles in manifolds with all sectional curvatures bounded byκ≤0. The second is a more detailed use of the structure theory of Lie groups. (ii) A general symmetric spaceX=G/Kwill contain geodesically embedded copies of Euclidean spacesR dima , called flats. These arise from taking the exponential map of maximal abelian sub- algebras insidep. If the sequence of points{x n }is contained in such a flat, the condition on convergence of vector-valued distance from Theorem 3.3.9 is both necessary and sufficient for the existence of the geodesic. 3.4. Symmetric spaces and the Oseledets theorem An introduction to the formalism used below is available in the book of Zimmer \[Zim84\]. For this section we consider more general real reductive Lie groupsG. This class includesGL n R, not justSL n R, so it allows factors such asR × . For most considerations, including symmetric spaces and the Oseledets theorem, everything can be reduced to semisimple groups. Indeed, for a cocycle inGL n R, the maps can be rescaled to assume the cocycle acts by matrices with determinant±1. 3.4.1. Setup.Recall thatT: (Ω,μ)→(Ω,μ)is an ergodic probability measure preserving transformation andE→Ωis a vector bundle equipped with a metric‖−‖. The extension ofTto a cocycle onEis a collection of linear maps between the fibers ofE: T ω :E ω →E Tω (3.4.2) IfGis a reductive Lie group, what does it mean to say that the maps T ω belong to this group? After all, the maps are between distinct vector spaces. 3.4.3. Principal bundles. Suppose thatE→Ωis a ranknvector bundle. For each fiberE ω consider the set of isomorphisms to a fixed NOTES ON MET21 vector space P ω := Isom(R n ,E ω )(3.4.4) Note thatP ω carries a right action ofGL n Rby precomposing the isomorphism. This action makes it isomorphic toGL n R, except that it does not have a distinguished basepoint. The spacesP ω glue to give a fiber bundleP→Ω. More generally, ifEhas some extra structure, e.g. a symplectic form, thenP x can be the set of isomorphisms respecting the extra structure on the source and target. It will be isomorphic to a subgroup ofGL n R, e.g. the symplectic group ifEcarries a symplectic form. By definition, a principalG-bundle overΩis a spacePwith a map P π −→Ωand a right action ofGonPsuch thatπ(pg) =π(p). Moreover, each fiberP ω must be isomorphic toGwith the rightG-action. 3.4.5. Induced bundles.LetP→Ωbe a principalG-bundle, and suppose thatGacts on another spaceF. The associated bundle over Ωwith fiberFis the quotient P× G F:= {(p,f)∈P×F} / (p,f)∼(pg,g −1 f) 3.4.6. Cocycles on principal bundles.Suppose thatΩcarries a T-action and a principalG-bundleP π −→Ω. Then a cocycleT:P→P is a lift of theT-action fromΩtoPwhich commutes with theG-action ofPon the right. IfGacts on a spaceF, then the cocycleTonPextends to a natural action ofTonP× G F. For instance, ifGhas a representation on F=R n , thenP× G R n is a vector bundle with a linear cocycle. 3.4.7. Example.Suppose thatG=GL n (R)andK=O n (R). Then X=G/Kis the space of metrics (coming from positive-definite inner products) onR n , with distinguished basepoint the euclidean metric (corresponding to the coseteK). Call this the standard metric‖−‖ std . Then forx=gK∈G/Kthe metric is given by‖v‖ x =‖g −1 v‖ std . Now, a vector bundleE→Ωgives rise to a principalG=GL n R- bundleP→Ω. ForX:=G/Kconsider the induced bundleX:= P× G X→Ω. A fiberX ω is the space of metrics onE ω . Thus, a metric onE→Ωis the same as a choice of point in each fiber ofX π −→Ω, i.e. a mapσ: Ω→Xsuch thatπ◦σ(ω) =ω. IfEis a cocycle overT: Ω→Ω, the action ofTextends toPand X. Typically it willnotpreserve the metric onEbut rather give an actionσ7→Tσon the space of metrics; forv∈E ω the new metric is 22SIMION FILIP defined by the action ofT: ‖v‖ Tσ(ω) :=‖Tv‖ σ(Tω) 3.4.8. Proposition.Consider the sequence of vector spaces and linear maps V ω T −→V Tω T −→V T 2 ω →··· Recall that each spaceV T • ω carries a metric‖−‖. Then the following statements are equivalent: (i)The Oseledets theorem holds forE ω , i.e. there exist numbers λ 1 >···> λ k 6=−∞and a filtrationV ≤λ i such that each v∈V ≤λ i \\V ≤λ i+1 has the asymptotic growth lim N→∞ 1 N log ∥ ∥ ∥T N v ∥ ∥ ∥=λ i (ii)The sequence of metrics‖−‖ N onV ω defined by‖v‖ N := ∥ ∥ ∥T N v ∥ ∥ ∥ is a regular sequence (see §3.3.6) in the symmetric space GL(V ω )/O(V ω ). HereO(V ω )is the group of orthogonal trans- formations preserving the initial metric onV ω . (iii)There exists an invertible liner mapΛ :V ω →V ω which is symmetric and self-adjoint (for the fixed metric onV ω ) and such that∀v∈V ω satisfies | 〈 Λ −2n (T n ) † T n v,v 〉 |=o(n) Above(T n ) † denotes the adjoint for the initial metrics onV ω andV T n ω . Proof. For the equivalence of (i) and (iii), assume first (i). Given the Oseledets filtrationV ≤λ j ω , defineV λ j ω as the orthogonal complement of V λ j+1 ω insideV ≤λ j ω . These spaces give a direct sum decomposition ofV ω . DeclareΛto act as the scalare λ j onV λ j ω . ThenΛsatifies (iii). Conversely, givenΛ, defineV λ j ω using the eigenspaces ofΛandV ≤λ j ω using the partial sums ofV λ j ω . The asymptotic behavior guaranteed by (iii) shows thatV ≤λ j ω satisfies the properties of the Oseledets filtration. Finally, the equivalence of (ii) and (iii) follows from the definition of a regular sequence in §3.3.6 and the description of a geodesic in §3.3.4. 3.4.9. Remark.Proposition 3.4.8 shows the Oseledets theorem for the cocycleV→Ωis equivalent to a statement on the associated bundle of symmetric spacesX:=P× G XwhereX=G/Kand G= GL n R,K= SO n R. NOTES ON MET23 Namely, we have the linear mapsT N :V ω →V T N ω and the initial norms‖−‖on the corresponding spaces. The dynamics defines new norms‖v‖ N := ∥ ∥ ∥T N v ∥ ∥ ∥ onV ω and it suffices to show that for a.e.ω∈Ω, this sequence of norms is regular in the symmetric spaceX ω . However, Kaimanovich’s Theorem 3.3.9 gives a simple criterion to check regularity of a sequence (see Theorem 3.5.1 below). 3.5. Geometric form of the Oseledets theorem 3.5.1. Theorem.LetE→Ωbe a cocycle over an ergodic measure- preserving transformationT: (Ω,μ)→(Ω,μ). Suppose thatEcarries a metric‖−‖such that (see(2.2.7)) ∫ Ω log + ‖T ω ‖ op dμ(ω)<∞and ∫ Ω log + ∥ ∥ ∥T −1 ω ∥ ∥ ∥ op dμ(ω)<∞ Consider the associated symmetric space bundleXwhose fiber over ω∈Ωis the space of metrics onE ω . Then the sequence of metrics defined by‖v‖ N := ∥ ∥ ∥T N v ∥ ∥ ∥is a regular sequence inX ω , forμ-a.e. ω∈Ω. From Proposition 3.4.8, the above theorem is equivalent to the usual form of the Oseledets Theorem 2.2.6. The proof of Theorem 3.5.1 will make use of the Subadditive Ergodic Theorem, recalled below. A proof is available, for example, in any of \[Led84, Mañ87, Via14\]. 3.5.2. Theorem (Kingman Subadditive Ergodic Theorem).LetTy (Ω,μ)be an ergodic probability measure-preserving transformation. Sup- pose that{f i }is a sequence of functions onΩwithf 1 ∈L 1 (Ω,μ)and satisfying the subadditivity condition f i (ω) +f j (T i ω)≥f i+j (ω)∀ω∈Ω,∀i,j≥1(3.5.3) Then forμ-a.e.ωthe limit 1 N f N (ω)exists (perhaps−∞) and can be computed as lim N→∞ 1 N f N (ω) = inf N 1 N ∫ Ω f N (ω)dμ(ω) Note that integrating the subadditivity condition(3.5.3)it follows that in the statement of the Subadditive Ergodic Theorem, eachf i is bounded above by a function inL 1 (Ω,μ). Therefore eachf i is the sum of a function inL 1 and an everywhere negative function. 24SIMION FILIP 3.5.4. Fekete’s lemma.Let{a n }be a subadditive sequence, i.e. as- sume that a n+m ≤a n +a m ∀n,m≥1 It is a classical exercise that the sequence 1 N a N has a limit given by the infimum: lim N 1 N a N = inf N 1 N a N which could potentially be−∞. Proof of Theorem 3.5.1.Define the sequence of functions f N (ω) := log ∥ ∥ ∥T N ω ∥ ∥ ∥ op The operator norms are computed for the initial norm‖−‖onE ω and E T N ω . Since for two linear maps‖A◦B‖ op ≤ ‖A‖ op ·‖B‖ op , the sequence {f i }satisfies the subadditivity condition(3.5.3)in the Kingman Theo- rem. Sincef 1 ∈L 1 (Ω,μ), Theorem 3.5.2 applies and so there existsλ 1 such that lim 1 N log ∥ ∥ ∥T N ω ∥ ∥ ∥ op =λ 1 (3.5.5) Finally, recall that the operator norm is the same as the first singular value ofT ω (see(3.2.7)). Thus the quantity 1 N log(σ 1 (T N ω ))converges μ-a.e. Apply now the same construction to the exterior power bundlesΛ k V to find that in fact all (normalized) singular values converge. Finally, recall that the Cartan projectionr(x N )was given by considering the singular values of the corresponding operator, and so 1 N r(x N )converge (wherex N denote the pull-back metrics afterNsteps). To check the small steps condition in Theorem 3.3.9, recall that if f∈L 1 (Ω,μ)then by the Birkhoff Theorem 2.1.3 (see(2.5.6)) it follows that forμ-a.e.ω∈Ω 1 N f(T N ω)→0(3.5.6) Settingf(ω) =log + ‖T ω ‖ op andf(ω) =log + ‖T −1 ω ‖ op gives the desired bound on the increments of the highest and lowest singular values, and hence on the intermediate ones. 3.5.7. Remark. The integrability assumption onT −1 ω in Theorem 3.5.1 is not strictly necessary. In order to have a formulation without it, one needs to extend the notion of regular sequence to allow for super-linear divergence in certain “flat” directions in the symmetric space. Note that NOTES ON MET25 in the case of a cocycle valued inSL n (R), the integrability condition forT ω implies the one forT −1 ω . 4. The general Noncommutative Ergodic Theorem This lecture follows closely the notes of Karlsson \[Kar\]. The main result in the case of isometries was proved by Karlsson–Ledrappier \[KL06\] and recently extended by Gouëzel–Karlsson to semi-contractions \[GK15\]. Horofunctions are introduced in §4.1; the case of divergence to infinity along geodesics, i.e. the case of Busemann functions, is illustrated in §4.2. A very general form of a Noncommutative Ergodic Theorem is stated in §4.3 and proved in §4.4. It is illustrated with a non-trivial example in §4.5. 4.1. Horofunctions 4.1.1. Setup.Let(X,d)be a metric space which is proper, i.e. balls of bounded radius are compact. LetC 0 (X)be the space of continuous functions onX, with thesup-norm. Fix a basepointx 0 ∈X. This defines an embedding Φ :X→C 0 (X) x7→Φ(x)(y) =d(x,y)−d(x,x 0 ) To simplify notation,Φ(x)will also be denoted byh x . 4.1.2. Remark. (i) The functionsh x are1-Lipschitz, since they are given by dis- tance toxwith a constant subtracted. (ii) The mapΦitself is1-Lipschitz, since |Φ(x)(y)−Φ(x)(z)|=|d(x,y)−d(x,z)|≤d(y,z) (iii) The map is normalized to haveh x (x 0 ) = 0and it is moreover in- jective. Indeed, ifd(x,x 0 )≥d(y,x 0 )thenΦ(y)(x)−Φ(x)(x)≥ d(x,y)>0. 4.1.3. Definition.Themetric bordificationofXis its closure inside C 0 (X): X:=Φ(X) =X∩∂X. 26SIMION FILIP IfXis proper, thenXis (sequentially) compact by Arzela–Ascoli and because the functionsh x are1-Lipschitz. Functions in∂Xare called horofunctionsonX. 4.1.4. Example. (i)IfX=R 2 with Euclidean distance, then∂R 2 equals the linear functions of norm1. (ii)IfD 2 ∼ = H 2 is the hyperbolic plane, then the boundary is iso- morphic toRP 1 . In the upper halfplane model, corresponding to∞∈∂His the function−logy(withx 0 = √ −1∈H). 4.1.5. Proposition.The action of the isometry group ofXextends continuously to an action onX. Given an isometrygand a function h∈X, the action is by the formula g·h(z) :=h(g −1 z)−h(g −1 x 0 )(4.1.6) Proof. The action described in(4.1.6)is continuous on the space of functions, so it suffices to check its compatibility with the action onX. Suppose thatx∈Xhas corresponding functionh x . We have the chain of equalities h gx (z) =d(gx,z)−d(gx,x 0 ) =d(x,g −1 z)−d(x,x 0 )−(d(x,g −1 x 0 )−d(x,x 0 )) =h x (g −1 z)−h x (g −1 x 0 ) This shows the compatibility of actions. 4.1.7. Remark.Up to homeomorphism, the spaceXis independent of the choice of basepointx 0 ∈X. Consider the quotientC 0 (X)→ C 0 (X)/{const.}of the space of continuous functions by the constant ones. Then the image ofΦ(X)under the quotient is independent of the basepointx 0 , and is still an embedding. 4.1.8. Semi-contractions. Letfbe a semi-contraction ofX, i.e. d(fx,fy)≤d(x,y)for allx,y∈X. Consider the quantityd(x 0 ,f n x 0 ) and apply the triangle inequality with the semi-contraction property to find d(x 0 ,f n+m x 0 )≤d(x 0 ,f n x 0 ) +d(f n x 0 ,f n+m x 0 ) ≤d(x 0 ,f n x 0 ) +d(x 0 ,f m x 0 ) Thus the limit of 1 N d(x 0 ,f N x 0 )exists, and is called thelinear driftof the semi-contractionf. In fact, the drift can be detected by a single horofunction. NOTES ON MET27 4.1.9. Proposition(Karlsson).Let(X,d)be a proper metric space andfa semicontraction with linear driftl. Then there existsh∈Φ(X) such that ∀k≥0h(f k x 0 )≤−l·k ∀x∈Xlim N −1 N h(f N x) =l 4.1.10. Exercise.Supposea n+m ≤a n +a m andlim 1 N a N =l. Then there exists a subsequence{m j }of1,2,3,...such that for any further subsequence{n i }of{m j }we have for allk≥0: lim inf n i (a n i −k −a n i )≤−l·k Proof of Proposition 4.1.9. Seta n :=d(x 0 ,f n x 0 )and pick the subse- quence{m j }provided by Exercise 4.1.10. SinceXis compact, pick a further subsequence{n i }such thatf n i x 0 converge to an element h∈X. Next, observe that−a k ≤h(f k x 0 )since from the definition ofhwe have h(f k (x 0 )) = lim n i d(f n i x 0 ,f k x 0 )−d(f n i x 0 ,x 0 )≥−d(x 0 ,f k x 0 ) Using the definition ofhagain, we have h(f k (x 0 )) = lim n i d(f n i x 0 ,f k x 0 )−d(f n i x 0 ,x 0 ) ≤lim inf n i (a n i −k −a n i ) It follows that −a k ≤h(f k (x 0 ))≤−l·k and this gives the first part. Moreover, since 1 k h (f k x 0 )→land d(f k (x 0 ),f k (x))stays bounded, it follows the limit(4.2.6)holds for allx∈X. 4.2. Busemann functions For a general metric space, horofunctions can give too large of a com- pactification. For geodesic metric spaces, a subclass of horofunctions is distinguished as coming from geodesic rays. These notions are intro- duced and illustrated below, and taken up again in §5.1. 28SIMION FILIP 4.2.1. Geodesics.An interval\[0,r\]⊂Rof unspecified length will be denotedIand ageodesic segmentinsideXwill mean an isometric embeddingγ:I→X. If the endpoints of the geodesic segment are x=γ(0)andy=γ(r), its image is denoted\[x,y\]. Themetric space isgeodesicif there is at least one geodesic between any two points. A geodesic rayis an isometric embedding of\[0,+∞)intoX. 4.2.2. Definition.Letγ: \[0,∞)→Xbe a geodesic ray starting at x 0 . Define h γ (x) := lim t→∞ d(γ(t),x)−t Equivalently, one can take the limit ofΦ(γ(t))in the compactification Xin Definition 4.1.3. The functionh γ obtained this way is called a Busemann function. 4.2.3.CAT(0)spaces.Let(X,d)be a geodesic metric space. It is called aCAT(0)space if the following holds for all triples of points x,y,z∈X. Connect the pointsx,y,zby geodesics, and pick two pointsp,qon distinct geodesics. InR 2 , there is a unique up to isometry triangle with verticesx ′ ,y ′ ,z ′ which has the same side lengths as the triangle formed byx,y,z. There is a unique map preserving lengths between the sides ofx,y,zandx ′ ,y ′ ,z ′ and letp ′ ,q ′ be the images ofp,q. Then we must have d X (p,q)≤d R 2 (p ′ ,q ′ ) A large class of examples ofCAT(0)-spaces comes from complete, simply-connected manifolds with non-positive sectional curvature. For instanceSL n (R)/SO n (R)satisfies the requirements. Busemann functions give natural examples of horofunctions, and for CAT(0)spaces, any boundary point of the metric bordification∂X⊂X comes from a Busemann functionh γ for some geodesic rayγ. See also §5.1.6 for more on the equivalence of boundaries forCAT(0)spaces. 4.2.4. Gromov-hyperbolic spaces.A geodesic metric spaceXis δ-hyperbolic if its triangles areδ-thin, i.e. for anyx,y,z∈Xwe have \[x,y\]⊂N δ (\[x,z\]∪\[z,y\]) whereN δ (−)is theδ-neighborhood of a set. Unlike theCAT(0)-property which holds at all scales, and in par- ticular locally,δ-hyperbolicity is coarse and does not restrict the local geometry of a space. The metric (or horocycle) bordification∂ hor Xof NOTES ON MET29 aδ-hyperbolic space is in general too large. A more natural boundary is formed by quasi-isometry classes of rays∂ ray Xand there is a natural map∂ hor X→∂ ray X. Moreover, if two differenth,h ′ ∈∂ hor Xhave the same image in the ray compactification, thenh−h ′ is bounded by a constant uniformly onX. Nevertheless, ergodic theorems such as Theorem 4.3.1 can be developed in this setting. 4.2.5. Busemann functions forSL n R/SO n R.Consider the space p:={M∈Mat n×n (R)|M=M t ,trM= 0}. Recall we also have the symmetric space X= SL n R/SO n R= =P n (R) :={M∈Mat n×n (R)|M=M t ,detM= 1} The exponential map takespdiffeomorphically toP n (R). Note that SL n Racts onP n (R)byg·M=gMg t . Pick nowα∈p; after a conjugation by an orthogonal matrix, we can assume thatαis diagonal, with eigenvalues occurring with multiplicity (n 1 ,···,n k ). Using the partition(n 1 ,···,n k )ofndefine F(α) =       P n 1 (R)0···0 0P n 2 (R)···0 . . . . . . . . . . . . 0···0P n k (R)       a product of sym- metric spaces N α =       1 n 1 (R)∗ ∗ ∗ 01 n 2 (R)∗ ∗ . . . . . . . . . ∗ 0···01 n k (R)       a unipotent sub- group This gives a set of coordinates via the isomorphism P n (R) ∼ = N α ·F(α)(4.2.6) The Busemann function corresponding toαis then h exp(α·t) (n·f) :=−tr(α·logf)(4.2.7) Note that this function is constant onN α -orbits. 4.3. Noncommutative Ergodic Theorem The next theorem was proved by Karlsson–Ledrappier \[KL06\]. 30SIMION FILIP 4.3.1. Theorem.Assume thatTy(Ω,μ)is a probability measure- preserving ergodic system. Let(X,d)be a metric space with chosen basepointx 0 ∈Xand isometry groupIsom(X,d). LetΩ→Isom(X,d)be a measurable map, and denote byg ω the isometry corresponding toω∈Ω. Assume that we have theL 1 -bound ∫ Ω d(g ω x 0 ,x 0 )dμ(ω)<∞ Then we have a linear drift defined by l:= inf N 1 N ∫ Ω d(g ω ···g T N−1 ω x 0 ,x 0 )dμ(ω)(4.3.2) In addition, forμ-a.e.ωwe have lim N 1 N d(g ω ···g T N−1 ω x 0 ,x 0 ) =l(4.3.3) Moreover, there exists a measurable map Ω→ X ω7→h ω such that forμ-a.e.ωwe have lim N→∞ −1 N h ω (g ω ···g T N−1 ω x 0 ) =l and ifl >0thenh ω ∈∂Xfor a.e.ω. 4.3.4. Remark. In general the mapω7→h ω need not be equivariant, i.e.h Tω need not equalg ω ·h ω . However, in many circumstances, e.g. whenXisCAT(0)orδ-hyperbolic, this equivariance property can be arranged in the appropriate boundary. 4.4. Proof of the Noncommutative Ergodic Theorem The following lemma is quite general and explains the mechanism in the proof of Theorem 4.3.1. 4.4.1. Lemma. (i)SupposeXis a compact metric space equipped with a continuous mapT:X→X. Letf:X→Rbe a continuous function and define f n (x) :=f(x) +···+f(T n−1 x) and the quantity a n := sup x∈X f n (x) NOTES ON MET31 Thena n+m ≤a n +a m and solim N 1 N a N =lexists. Moreover, there exists aT-invariant measureμonXsuch that ∫ X fdμ≥l. (ii)SupposeXis a compact metric space andT: (Ω,μ)→(Ω,μ) is an ergodic probability measure preserving system. LetS: Ω×X→Ω×Xbe of the formS(ω,x) := (Tω,g ω x)whereg ω is a homeomorphism ofXforμ-a.e.ω. Let alsof: Ω×X→R be a function such thatf(ω,−) :X→Ris continuous forμ-a.e. ω. Define the Birkhoff averages f n (ω,x) :=f(ω,x) +f(S(ω,x)) +···+f(S n−1 (ω,x)) and their fiberwise supremumF n (ω) := sup x∈X f n (ω,x). ThenF n+m (ω)≤F n (ω) +F m (T n ω), so the sequence satisfies the assumptions of the Kingman Theorem 3.5.2. Therefore 1 N F N (ω)tends to a limitlforμ-a.e.ω. Then there exists anS-invariant probability measureηon Ω×X, with projection toηequal toμ, and such that ∫ Ω×X Fdη≥l The topic of “ergodic optimization” is concerned with results similar to the one above; a more general statement, in whichF n (ω)are a subadditive sequence of upper semi-continuous functions, can be found in the paper of Morris \[Mor13, Thm. A.3\]. Proof. The proof of (ii) is similar to that of (i), so we focus on the latter. SinceXis compact, the continuous functionf n achieves the supre- mum at some pointx n . Define a probability measure using Dirac delta-functions on the trajectory ofx n by μ n := 1 n (δ x n +···+δ T n−1 x n ) Then by construction ∫ fdμ n = 1 n sup x f n (x) = 1 n a n ≥l. Letμbe a weak-\* limit of theμ n . ThenμisT-invariant (by a Krylov– Bogoliubov type argument) and satisfies ∫ fdμ≥lby construction. For the proof of (ii), one needs to select maximizers off n in each fiber ofΩ×X→Ω(see also the end of proof of Theorem 4.3.1). Namely, one constructs a mapσ n : Ω→Xsuch thatF n (ω) =f n (σ n (ω)). Then the measureη n is defined as the average along anS-orbit of lengthn of the measure(σ n ) ∗ μand the proof proceeds as before. 32SIMION FILIP 4.4.2. Measurable selection theorems.In the above proof, one needs to construct measurable sections of the projection mapΩ×X→Ω with image in the maximizing set of the functionsf n . While it is not true that any measurable surjective mapp:A→Bbetween two Borel spaces has a Borel section, the following variants do hold and either one suffices for the current applications: (i)\[Bog07, Thm. 6.9.6, Vol. 2\], \[Kec95, Thm. 35.46\] LetX,Y be Polish spaces andΓ⊂X×Ya Borel set such that for all x∈Xthe fibersΓ x :={y∈Y:(x,y)∈Γ}areσ-compact. ThenΓcontains the graph of a Borel mappingf:X→Y. (ii)\[Arv76, Thm 3.4.1\] Letp:P→Ωbe a Borel map from a Polish spacePto a Borel spaceΩ. Assume thatpmaps open sets to Borel sets, and the preimage of any point inΩis a closed set inP. Thenphas a Borel section. 4.4.3. Translation distance and horocycles.For an isometrygof X, the distance by which it movesx 0 can be measured by d(x 0 ,gx 0 ) = max h∈X −h(g −1 x 0 )(4.4.4) Indeed, assume thathcomes from a pointz∈X. Then −h z (g −1 x 0 ) =d(z,x 0 )−d(z,g −1 x 0 ) ≤d(x 0 ,g −1 x 0 ) =d(x 0 ,gx 0 ) This inequality persists in the closureXofX. Takingz=g −1 x 0 achieves equality. 4.4.5. A cocycle function.Define therefore the function F: Isom(X)×X→R F(g,h) :=−h(g −1 x 0 ) If the functionhcomes from a pointz∈X, i.e.h=h z , then the following cocycle property holds: F(g 1 g 2 ,h z ) =− ( d(z,g −1 2 g −1 1 x 0 )−d(z,x 0 ) ) =− ( d(g 2 z,g −1 1 x 0 )−d(g 2 z,x 0 ) +d(g 2 z,x 0 )−d(z,x 0 ) ) =F(g 1 ,g 2 h z ) +F(g 2 ,h z ) By continuity of the action of isometries, this property extends to all h∈X: F(g 1 g 2 ,h) =F(g 1 ,g 2 h) +F(g 2 ,h) NOTES ON MET33 4.4.6. The total space of the cocycle.Consider the spaceΩ× X→Ω. Extend the action ofTonΩto a mapSonΩ×Xby S(ω,h) := (Tω,g −1 ω h). Define now the function f 1 : Ω× X→R f 1 (ω,h) :=F(g −1 ω ,h) The Birkhoff sums forf 1 and the transformationS, using the cocycle property ofF, can be expressed as: f n (ω,h) := n−1 ∑ i=0 f 1 (S i (ω,h)) =F(g −1 ω ,h) +F(g −1 Tω ,g −1 ω h) +···+F(g −1 T n−1 ω ,g −1 T n−2 ω ···g −1 ω h) =F(g −1 T n−1 ω ···g −1 ω ,h) By the definition ofF, this gives f n (ω,h) =−h(g ω ···g T n−1 ω x 0 ) 4.4.7. Existence of the drift.Define the functions F n (ω) :=d(g Tω ···g T n ω x 0 ,x 0 ) Then by the triangle inequalityF n+m (ω)≤F n (ω)+F m (T n ω). Therefore the driftldefined in(4.3.2)exists by subadditivity of the integrals of F n . The limit(4.3.3)existsμ-a.e. and equalslby the Kingman ergodic theorem. 4.4.8. Existence of a maximizing measure.Note that by Eqn. (4.4.4) the functionsF n also satisfy F n (ω) = max x∈ X f n (ω,x) Thus, by Lemma 4.4.1 there exists a measureηonΩ× Xsuch that ∫ Ω× X f 1 dη≥l Note however than sinceF n (ω)≥sup x f n (ω,x), it follows that for any T-invariant measure the reverse inequality also holds: ∫ Ω×X f 1 dη≤l 34SIMION FILIP 4.4.9. Existence ofh ω .Let nowMbe the set of all(ω,x)for which the Birkhoff theorem holds for the measureηand the functionf 1 . Then Mis ofη-full measure, so overμ-a.e.ωthe setMis not empty. Using a measurable selection theorem (see §4.4.2) there is a mapω7→h ω ∈M and by construction it satisfies the required properties. 4.5. An example This discussion follows an unpublished note by Karlsson–Monod (see \[Kar\]). See also the book of Aaronson \[Aar97, Prop. 2.3.1\]. Consider a functionD:R ≥0 →R ≥0 which is •Increasing, andD(0) = 0 •D(t)→∞ast→∞ • D(t) t →0monotonically ast→∞ This implies that 1 t+s D(t+s)≤ 1 t D(t) Assuming thatt≤sthis gives D(t+s)≤D(t) + s t D(t) =D(t) + D(t)/t D(s)/s D(s)≤D(t) +D(s) ThereforeRequipped with the distance functiond(x,y) :=D(|x−y|)is a proper metric space. One can check that the only point in the metric bordification is in this case the zero function, i.e.X=X∪{h≡0}. The isometry group is stillR, acting by translations. So a function f: Ω→Rcan be viewed as a map to the isometry group. 4.5.1. Corollary. Assume thatT: (Ω,μ)→(Ω,μ)is a probability measure-preserving transformation, andf: Ω→RisD-integrable, i.e. ∫ Ω D(|f|)dμ <∞ Then we have lim 1 N D ( |f(ω) +···+f(T N−1 ω)| ) = 0 4.5.2. Example(Marcinkiewic–Zygmund).TakeD(t) :=t p with0< p < 1. Assume thatf∈L p (Ω,μ)(note that typicallyf /∈L 1 (Ω,μ)). Then it follows that 1 N ( f(ω) +···+f(T N−1 ω) ) p →0 NOTES ON MET35 or equivalently 1 N 1/p ( f(ω) +···+f(T N−1 ω) ) →0 5. Mean versions of the Multiplicative Ergodic Theorem This section contains anL 2 -analogue of the Multiplicative Ergodic Theo- rem. The geometry of non-positively curved spaces allows a streamlined presentation of the results. The setting is that ofCAT(0)-spaces, but the results hold in the more general case of metric spaces which are uniformly convex and non-positively curved in the sense of Busemann (see e.g. \[KM99\]). The definitions and basic properties ofCAT(0)-spaces are discussed in §5.1; a more comprehensive treatment can be found in the mono- graph of Bridson–Haefliger \[BH99\]. Direct integrals of metric spaces are defined in §5.2, following Monod \[Mon06\]. These are “big” metric spaces which inherit nice curvature properties of their constituents. Us- ing the developed formalism, a Mean Multiplicative Ergodic Theorem is proved in §5.3. We end in §5.4 with a mean form of Kingman’s subadditive ergodic theorem. Throughout this section,Xwill be a metric space equipped with a distanced(−,−). The space will be assumed complete, but not necessarily proper (i.e. locally compact). 5.1.CAT(0)spaces Below we recall two more equivalent definitions ofCAT(0)spaces. De- pending on the context, one is easier to use than the other. 5.1.1. Definition via comparison triangles.One definition already appears in §4.2.3 and says that triangles are thinner than their com- parison analogues in Euclidean space. A variant (which can be easier to check) is as follows. Let\[y,z\]be a geodesic segment andm∈\[y,z\] its midpoint. For any other pointx∈Xthere exist points in Eu- clidean spacex ′ ,y ′ ,z ′ such that the pairwise distances betweenx,y,z andx ′ ,y ′ ,z ′ coincide; furthermore letm ′ ∈\[y ′ ,z ′ \]be the correspond- ing midpoint. Then the (complete) metric spaceXisCAT(0)if d(x,m)≤d(x ′ ,m ′ ). 36SIMION FILIP 5.1.2. Definition via the parallelogram law.The spaceXisCAT(0) if for anyy 1 ,y 2 ∈Xthere exists a pointm∈Xsuch that the following holds∀x∈X: d(x,m) 2 ≤ 1 2 ( d(x,y 1 ) 2 + d(x,y 2 ) 2 ) − 1 4 d(y 1 ,y 2 ) 2 By appropriate choices ofx, it follows thatmis theuniquemidpoint of\[y 1 ,y 2 \]. Note that if in a complete metric space any two points have a unique midpoint, then the space is geodesic, and moreover geodesics are unique. 5.1.3. Convexity. The geometry of aCAT(0)space enjoys a number of convexity properties, some of which are summarized below. A set C⊂Xisconvexif it contains the geodesic between any two of its points. (i) For any pointxand geodesicγinX, the distance function d(x,γ(t))is convex. This follows after some algebraic manipu- lations from §5.1.2. (ii)For two geodesic raysγ 1 ,γ 2 the functiond(γ 1 (a 1 t),γ 2 (a 2 t))is convex int, for anya 1 ,a 2 ≥0. (iii) For two geodesic raysγ 1 ,γ 2 that start at the same point, the function 1 t d(γ 1 (t),γ 2 (t))is semi-increasing. (iv)The distance function to a convex set (defined on all ofX) is itself a convex function. (v)For a convex subsetCthe nearest point projection mapp: X→Cis well-defined and distance-decreasing. 5.1.4. Uniform convexity.A metric spaceXadmitting midpoints is uniformly convexif there exists a strictly decreasing continuous function gon\[0,1\]withg(0) = 1satisfying: For allx,y 1 ,y 2 ∈X, withmthe midpoint of\[y 1 ,y 2 \]andR:= max(d(x,y 1 ),d(x,y 2 ))we have d(x,m) R ≤g ( d(y 1 ,y 2 ) R ) The functiongis called the modulus of convexity. ForCAT(0)-spaces, the functiong() := (1− 1 4  2 ) 1 2 works. This follows directly from the definition in §5.1.2. We will need the following result, reproduced from \[KM99, Lemma 3.1\], which is valid for all uniformly convex metric spaces. NOTES ON MET37 5.1.5. Lemma.Letx,y,z∈Xbe points satisfying an almost reverse triangle inequality: (1−) d(x,y) + d(y,z)≤d(x,z) for some >0. Lety ′ be the point on the geodesic\[x,z\]such that d(x,y ′ ) =d(x,y). Then there existsf()>0withf()→0as→0 such that d(y,y ′ )≤f() d(x,y) Proof. From the definition ofy ′ and the assumption of the lemma, it follows that max (d(z,y),d(z,y ′ ))≤d(x,z)−(1−) d(x,y) Settingmto be the midpoint of\[y,y ′ \], the uniform convexity ofXgives d(z,m)≤max (d(z,y),d(z,y ′ )) The triangle inequality gives d(x,m)≥d(x,z)−d(z,m) which combined with the last two inequalities gives d(x,m)≥(1−) d(x,y) Using this inequality and settingR=d(x,y) =d(x,y ′ ), the definition of uniform convexity gives 1−≤ d(x,m) R ≤g ( d(y,y ′ ) 2R ) Sincegis continuous and strictly decreasing withg(0) = 1, it follows that d(y,y ′ ) 2R ≤f()withf()→0as→0. This is the required conclusion. 5.1.6. Boundaries.Starting from aCAT(0)-spaceX, one can asso- ciate in a natural way a boundary∂Xto it. WhenXis locally compact, the union equipped with a natural topologyX=X ∐ ∂Xis com- pact. Two constructions are possible: one using equivalence classes of geodesics, and another using horofunctions. ForCAT(0)-spaces, these give naturally isomorphic boundaries. 38SIMION FILIP 5.1.7. Geodesic, or visual, boundary.Define∂ geod Xto consist of equivalence classes of geodesic raysγ: \[0,∞)→X, where two geodesics are equivalent if they are a bounded distance away from each other. Alternatively, fix a basepointx 0 ∈Xand define the boundary to equal all geodesic rays starting atx 0 . Each geodesic ray is equivalent to a unique one starting atx 0 , so the boundary is independent of the choice of basepoint. 5.1.8. Horofunction boundary. The spaceXnaturally embeds in the space of1-Lipschitz function, and the horofunction, or metric bordi- fication ofXis described in Definition 4.1.3. The equivalence between the geodesic and horofunction boundaries is given by Busemann func- tions, Definition 4.2.2. 5.2. Direct integrals ofCAT(0)spaces The presentation in this section follows the article of Monod \[Mon06\]. The concept of direct integral ofCAT(0)-spaces is developed there and further used to prove superrigidity-type statements for product group actions. A slightly more general setting would be that of uniformly convex, non-positively curved metric spaces in the sense of Busemann. Then, one could takeL p -norms (with1< p <∞) in Definition 5.2.2 of direct integrals of metric spaces. 5.2.1. Setup.Let(Ω,μ)be a Borel measure space, and letX p −→Ωbe a bundle ofCAT(0)-spaces. For instance, the bundle could be trivial: X=X×ΩwhereXis aCAT(0)-space. Abasepointfor the bundle is a sectionσ 0 : Ω→Xsuch thatp◦σ 0 =1 Ω . Denote byL 2 (Ω,μ)the space of real valued functions onΩwhich have finiteL 2 -norm for the measureμ(up toμ-a.e. equivalence). 5.2.2. Definition. Thedirect integralof metric spaces is the set of measurable sections whose distance toσ 0 is inL 2 (Ω,μ): L 2 (X,μ) :={σ: Ω→X|d(σ 0 ,σ)∈L 2 (Ω,μ)}. and two sections are identified if they agreeμ-a.e. The distance between two sections is defined by d(σ 1 ,σ 2 ) 2 := ∫ Ω d(σ 0 (ω),σ(ω)) 2 dμ(ω)<∞(5.2.3) NOTES ON MET39 The integral defining the distance is finite by pointwise comparison: two sections at finiteL 2 -distance fromσ 0 are at finiteL 2 -distance from each other. 5.2.4. Properties.Checking the definitions one finds that: (i)The metric spaceL 2 (X,μ)is complete and separable, ifμ-a.e. fiber ofXis. (ii)The direct integral ofCAT(0)-spaces is itselfCAT(0). This is immediate from the definition via the parallelogram law §5.1.2. (iii)The midpointσ m of two sectionsσ x ,σ y is given by the pointwise midpoint in each fiber. 5.2.5. Geodesics. A geodesicγ: \[0,r\]→L 2 (X,μ)is equivalent to the data of (i) A functionα∈L 2 (Ω,μ)satisfying ∫ Ω α 2 dμ= 1(called asemi- density). (ii)A (measurable) collection of geodesicsγ ω : \[0,r·α(ω)\]→X ω satisfying γ(t)(ω) =γ ω (t·α(ω)) A verification of this description is available in \[Mon06, Prop. 44\]. 5.2.6. Boundaries.The boundary ofL 2 (X,μ)is a join integral: ∂L 2 (X,μ) := ∫ ∗ Ω (∂X ω )dμ(ω) where an element of the right-hand side is the data(φ,α)of a mea- surable sectionφ(ω)∈∂X ω and a semi-densityα(see §5.2.5(i)). This description is detailed in \[Mon06, Rmk. 48\]. 5.2.7. Induced actions.Suppose now that the bundleX→Ωis equipped with an actionTby fiberwise isometries. This gives a trans- formationTyΩand isometriesT ω :X ω →X Tω . The action ofTthen naturally extends to sections of the bundle by the formula (T ∗ σ)(ω) :=T −1 ω (σ(Tω)).(5.2.8) Assume that the action satisfies theL 2 -integrability conditiond(σ 0 ,T ∗ σ 0 )< ∞. Then we have an action by pullback on the entire spaceL 2 (X,μ). 40SIMION FILIP 5.2.9. Remark.Inspecting the definition of pullback of sections in Eqn. (5.2.8) it is more natural to define the induced action on the metric space bundleXby T ω :X Tω →X ω Indeed, this would be more compatible with the previous sections, where Xis the bundle of fiberwise metrics on a vector bundle. Given a linear map between vector spaces, the induced map on the space of metrics is by pullback, and goes the other way. 5.3. Mean Multiplicative Ergodic Theorem The construction of direct integrals ofCAT(0)spaces described in the previous section allows for a rather direct proof of a mean form of the Multiplicative Ergodic Theorem. The discussion below follows Karlsson & Margulis \[KM99\] and illustrates their proof in the setting of a single semi-contraction of aCAT(0)-space. 5.3.1. Theorem. LetXbe a completeCAT(0)space andT:X→X be a semi-contraction (i.e.d(Tx,Ty)≤d(x,y)∀x,y∈X). Then there exists a numberA≥0, and a geodesic rayγ, such that for any starting pointx 0 ∈Xwe have that 1 n d (T n x 0 ,γ(A·n)) n→+∞ −−−−→0 Theorem 5.3.1 applies immediately to the direct integral ofCAT(0)- spaces to give the following mean version of the Multiplicative Ergodic Theorem. 5.3.2. Corollary.LetTy(Ω,μ)be an ergodic probability measure preserving system, and letX→Ωbe a bundle ofCAT(0)-spaces. Assume given a sectionσ 0 : Ω→Xand an induced action ofTon Xby fiberwise isometries, such that the integrability assumptions from §5.2.7 are satisfied. Then there existsA≥0and geodesic raysγ ω ∈X ω such that the orbits ofσ 0 track sublinearly the geodesicsγ ω . More precisely: 1 n ( ∫ Ω d ( T n ω σ 0 (ω),γ T n ω (A·n) ) 2 dμ(ω) ) 1 2 n→+∞ −−−−→0 Proof of Corollary 5.3.2. The result follows from Theorem 5.3.1 by con- sidering the induced action, in the sense of §5.2.7, on theCAT(0)-space L 2 (X,μ). NOTES ON MET41 Proof of Theorem 5.3.1.Definex n :=T n x 0 . By the discussion in §3.5.4 and §4.1.8, the subadditive sequencea n :=d(x 0 ,x n )has linear growth: lim N 1 N a N =A≥0.(5.3.3) Assume thatA >0, otherwise the theorem is immediate. We will construct successive approximations to the tracking geodesic, and all our geodesic will start at the basepointx 0 . Fix a sequence i >0 whose speed of decrease to zero will be described later. 5.3.4. Picking the record holders.For now freeze i >0. Because of Eqn. (5.3.3), there existsK i such that (A− i )·n≤a n ≤(A+ i )·n∀K i ≤n(5.3.5) The sequenceb n =a n −(A− i )·ndiverges to+∞asn→∞. Thus there exists arbitrarily largeN i such thatb N i is larger than all of the previous elements, i.e. we have a N i −(A− i )·N i ≥a n −(A− i )·n∀n≤N i or rewriting it: a N i −a n ≥(A− i )·(N i −n)∀n≤N i (5.3.6) PickN i such thatN i > K i+1 whereK i is defined by Eqn. (5.3.5). 5.3.7. Geometry of record holders. We now rewrite the above in- equalities in terms of distances, valid for allx n withK i ≤n≤N i . From Eqn. (5.3.6) we find d(x 0 ,x N i )≥d(x 0 ,x n ) + (A− i )·(N i −n) ≥d(x 0 ,x n ) + A− i A+ i ·d(x 0 ,x N i −n )by Eqn. (5.3.5) ≥d(x 0 ,x n ) + A− i A+ i ·d(x n ,x N i )by semi-contraction. The inequality just obtained is exactly the almost reverse triangle in- equality to which Lemma 5.1.5 will apply. 5.3.8. Constructing the geodesic. Defineγ i to be the geodesic con- nectingx 0 andx N i ; it has lengtha N i . Let alsox ′ N i−1 be the point on the geodesicγ i at distancea N i−1 fromx 0 . Recall that by construction 42SIMION FILIP we haveK i < N i−1 < N i . Therefore the inequality in §5.3.7 holds for n=N i−1 and so Lemma 5.1.5 gives d(x N i−1 ,x ′ N i−1 )≤f ( 2 i A+ i ) d(x 0 ,x N i−1 )(5.3.9) Now for anyr≤d(x 0 ,x N i−1 ), we have the pointsγ i (r)andγ i−1 (r). For r=d(x 0 ,x N i−1 )Eqn. (5.3.9) gives a bound for the distance between points of the form d(γ i−1 (r),γ i (r))≤f ( 2 i A+ i ) ·r. By the convexity property of distances in §5.1.3(iii) it follows that the same bound holds for allr≤d(x 0 ,x N i−1 ). Pick now the sequence i →0such thatf ( 2 i A+ i ) ≤2 −i ; this is possible sincef()→0as→0. For fixedrthe sequence of points γ i (r)form a Cauchy sequence and converge to a pointγ(r)and giving a geodesic rayγstarting atx 0 . 5.3.10. Tracking property.It remains to check that the orbit{x n } stays near the geodesicγ. For anykthere is anisuch thatK i ≤k≤N i . The triangle inequality and the previous bounds give: d(γ(A·k),x k )≤d(γ(Ak),γ i (Ak)) + d(γ i (Ak),γ i (a k )) + d(γ i (a k ),x k ) ≤2 −i+1 ·A·k+|A·k−a k |+f ( 2 i A+ i ) ·a k ≤2 −i+1 ·A·k+|A·k−a k |+ 2 −i ·a k It follows then immediately that 1 k d(γ(A·k),x k )→0, which ends the proof. 5.3.11. Remark. (i) The above proof works in the general setting of uniformly con- vex, non-positively curved in the sense of Busemann metric spaces (see \[KM99\]). (ii)The geodesic in the conclusion of Theorem 5.3.1 is unique, assuming the basepoint is fixed. This follows from the convexity property in §5.1.3(iii). 5.4. Mean Kingman theorem We end with anL 2 -version of Kingman’s Subadditive Ergodic Theorem, under a slightly stronger assumption. NOTES ON MET43 5.4.1. Proposition.LetTy(Ω,μ)by an ergodic probability measure- preserving action, and letUyL 2 (Ω,μ)be the induced unitary operator on functions. Letf n ∈L 2 (Ω,μ)be a sequence of functions satisfying f n ≥0pointwiseμ-a.e. and f n+m ≤f n +U n f m pointwiseμ-a.e. Denote the averages bya n :=〈1 Ω ,f n 〉, which is a subadditive sequence with limit 1 n a n →A. Then we have lim n→+∞ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 n f n −A ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ L 2 = 0. The proof below will use von Neumann’s ergodic theorem. Proof. Note that〈f n ,A·1 Ω 〉=a n ·A, so expanding ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 n f n −A ∥ ∥ ∥ 2 it suffices to show that ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 n f n ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ 2 −A 2 →0. Using again〈f n ,1 Ω 〉=a n and Cauchy–Schwarz gives ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 n f n ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ 2 ≥ ( a n n ) 2 →A 2 so it suffices to show thatlim sup ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 n f n ∥ ∥ ∥ 2 ≤A 2 . Fix nowk >0and divideNwith remainder asN=k·l+rwith0≤r < k. Applying the subadditivity assumption iteratively gives the pointwise bound f N ≤f k +U k f k +···+U k·(l−1) f k +U k·l f r and after dividing out byNand applying straightforward estimates 1 N f N ≤ 1 l (( 1 k f k ) +···+U k·(l−1) ( 1 k f k )) +O ( 1 N ) .(5.4.2) Recall from the von Neumann Mean Ergodic Theorem applied toU k that for anyg∈L 2 (Ω,μ)we have 1 l ( g+U k g+···+U k·(l−1) g ) L 2 −→P k (g) whereP k denotes orthogonal projection ontoU k -invariant vectors. Note also that the space ofU k -invariant vectors coincides with the direct sum of eigenspaces forUwith eigenvaluesζ d , whereζ d d = 1are roots of unity andddividesk. Pick now two arbitrarily largek 1 ,k 2 which are relatively prime, and apply the estimate from Eqn. (5.4.2) withk=k 1 ,k 2 . From the assumed 44SIMION FILIP positivity of the functions, it follows that lim sup ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 N f N ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ 2 ≤ 〈 P k 1 ( 1 k 1 f k 1 ) ,P k 2 ( 1 k 2 f k 2 )〉 Finally, note thatP k i (f k i ) =a k i ·1 ω +h i whereh i is in theU-eigenspaces corresponding to non-trivial roots of unity dividingk i . In particular sincek 1 andk 2 are relative prime, it follows that theh i and1 Ω are orthogonal. Since 1 k i a k i tends toAask i →∞, the desired upper bound follows.  Acknowledgements. These notes are based on lectures given at sev- eral summer schools. I am very grateful to the organizers of the sum- mer schools in Ilhabela, Brazil (January 2015, “Holomorphic Dynamics School”), Luminy, France (July 2015, “Translation Surfaces School”), and Moscow, Russia (May 2016 “Hyperbolic Geometry and Dynamics School”). These notes were strongly influenced and owe a great debt to the point of view in the works of Kaimanovich, Karlsson, Ledrappier, Margulis, Monod, Zimmer. I am also grateful for remarks and suggestions from Alex Eskin, Pascal Hubert, Misha Kapovich, Zemer Kosloff, Erwan Lan- neau, Carlos Matheus, Martin Möller, Nessim Sibony, Misha Verbitsky, Anton Zorich. I am also grateful to the referee for a careful reading and many suggestions and comments that significantly improved the text. This research was partially conducted during the period the author served as a Clay Research Fellow. References \[Aar97\]Aaronson J.—An introduction to infinite ergodic theory, vol. 50 of Mathematical Surveys and Monographs. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI — 1997.http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/surv/050. \[Arv76\]Arveson W.—An invitation toC ∗ -algebras. Springer-Verlag, New York- Heidelberg — 1976. Graduate Texts in Mathematics, No. 39. \[BH99\]Bridson M. R. & Haefliger A.—Metric spaces of non-positive cur- vature, vol. 319 ofGrundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften \[Fun- damental Principles of Mathematical Sciences\]. Springer-Verlag, Berlin — 1999.http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-12494-9. \[Boc\] Bochi J.— “The Multiplicative Ergodic Theorem of Oseledets”.Lecture notes available on the author’s website.http://www.mat.uc.cl/~jairo. bochi/docs/oseledets.pdf. \[Bog07\] Bogachev V. I.—Measure theory. Vol. I, II. Springer-Verlag, Berlin — 2007.http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-34514-5. NOTES ON MET45 \[EW11\]Einsiedler M. & Ward T.—Ergodic theory with a view towards num- ber theory, vol. 259 ofGraduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag Lon- don, Ltd., London — 2011.http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-0-85729- 021-2. \[FK60\] Furstenberg H. & Kesten H.— “Products of random matrices”.Ann. Math. Statist.31(1960) 457–469. \[GK15\]Gouëzel S. & Karlsson A.— “Subadditive and Multiplicative Er- godic Theorems”.ArXiv e-prints(Sept., 2015) —arXiv:1509.07733 \[math.DS\]. \[Ka ̆ı87\]Ka ̆ ımanovich V. A.— “Lyapunov exponents, symmetric spaces and a multiplicative ergodic theorem for semisimple Lie groups”.Zap. Nauchn. Sem. Leningrad. Otdel. Mat. Inst. Steklov. (LOMI)164no. Differentsial- naya Geom. Gruppy Li i Mekh. IX, (1987) 29–46, 196–197.http://dx. doi.org/10.1007/BF01840421. \[Kar\] Karlsson A.— “Ergodic Theorems for noncommuting random products”. Lecture notes available on the author’s website.http://www.unige.ch/ math/folks/karlsson/wroclawtotal.pdf. \[Kec95\] Kechris A. S.—Classical descriptive set theory, vol. 156 ofGraduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, New York — 1995.http://dx. doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4612-4190-4. \[KH95\]Katok A. & Hasselblatt B.—Introduction to the modern theory of dynamical systems, vol. 54 ofEncyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge — 1995.http://dx. doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511809187. With a supplementary chapter by Katok and Leonardo Mendoza. \[KL06\]Karlsson A. & Ledrappier F.— “On laws of large numbers for ran- dom walks”.Ann. Probab.34no. 5, (2006) 1693–1706.http://dx.doi. org/10.1214/009117906000000296. \[KM99\] Karlsson A. & Margulis G. A.— “A multiplicative ergodic theorem and nonpositively curved spaces”.Comm. Math. Phys.208no. 1, (1999) 107–123.http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s002200050750. \[Led84\]Ledrappier F.— “Quelques propriétés des exposants caractéristiques”. inÉcole d’été de probabilités de Saint-Flour, XII—1982— vol. 1097 of Lecture Notes in Math., pp. 305–396. Springer, Berlin — 1984.http: //dx.doi.org/10.1007/BFb0099434. \[LY85a\]Ledrappier F. & Young L.-S.— “The metric entropy of diffeomor- phisms. I. Characterization of measures satisfying Pesin’s entropy formula”. Ann. of Math. (2)122no. 3, (1985) 509–539.http://dx.doi.org/10. 2307/1971328. \[LY85b\], “The metric entropy of diffeomorphisms. II. Relations between entropy, exponents and dimension”.Ann. of Math. (2)122no. 3, (1985) 540–574.http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1971329. \[Mañ87\] Mañé R.—Ergodic theory and differentiable dynamics, vol. 8 ofErgeb- nisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3) \[Results in Mathe- matics and Related Areas (3)\]. Springer-Verlag, Berlin — 1987.http: //dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-70335-5 . Translated from the Por- tuguese by Silvio Levy. 46SIMION FILIP \[Mar74\]Margulis G. A.— “Arithmetic properties of discrete subgroups”.Uspehi Mat. Nauk29no. 1 (175), (1974) 49–98. \[Mon06\]Monod N.— “Superrigidity for irreducible lattices and geometric split- ting”.J. Amer. Math. Soc.19no. 4, (2006) 781–814.http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1090/S0894-0347-06-00525-X. \[Mor13\] Morris I. D.— “Mather sets for sequences of matrices and applications to the study of joint spectral radii”.Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (3)107no. 1, (2013) 121–150.http://dx.doi.org/10.1112/plms/pds080. \[Ose68\]Oseledets V. I.— “A multiplicative ergodic theorem. Characteristic Ljapunov, exponents of dynamical systems”.Trudy Moskov. Mat. Obšč. 19(1968) 179–210. \[Pes76\]Pesin J. B.— “Families of invariant manifolds that correspond to nonzero characteristic exponents”.Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat.40no. 6, (1976) 1332–1379, 1440. \[Pes77\], “Characteristic Ljapunov exponents, and smooth ergodic theory”. Uspehi Mat. Nauk32no. 4 (196), (1977) 55–112, 287. \[Rue79\] Ruelle D.— “Ergodic theory of differentiable dynamical systems”.Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math.no. 50, (1979) 27–58.http://www.numdam. org/item?id=PMIHES\_1979\_\_50\_\_27\_0. \[Rue82\] , “Characteristic exponents and invariant manifolds in Hilbert space”.Ann. of Math. (2)115no. 2, (1982) 243–290.http://dx.doi. org/10.2307/1971392. \[Via14\] Viana M.—Lectures on Lyapunov exponents, vol. 145 ofCambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge — 2014.http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139976602. \[Wal75\] Walters P.—Ergodic theory—introductory lectures. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 458. Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York — 1975. \[Wal93\] , “A dynamical proof of the multiplicative ergodic theorem”.Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.335no. 1, (1993) 245–257.http://dx.doi.org/10. 2307/2154267. \[Zim84\]Zimmer R. J.—Ergodic theory and semisimple groups, vol. 81 of Monographs in Mathematics. Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel — 1984.http: //dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4684-9488-4. Department of Mathematics Harvard University Cambridge, MA 02139 E-mail address:sfilip@math.harvard.edu