arXiv:1001.5313v1 \[math.DS\] 29 Jan 2010 A SEMI-INVERTIBLE OSELEDETS THEOREM WITH APPLICATIONS TO TRANSFER OPERATOR COCYCLES GARY FROYLAND, SIMON LLOYD, AND ANTHONY QUAS Abstract.Oseledets’ celebrated Multiplicative Ergodic Theorem (MET) \[V.I. Oseledec,A multiplicative ergodic theorem. Characteristic Ljapunov, expo- nents of dynamical systems, Trudy Moskov. Mat. Obˇsˇc.19(1968), 179–210.\] is concerned with the exponential growth rates of vectors under the action of a linear cocycle onR d . When the linear actions are invertible, the MET guarantees an almost-everywhere pointwisesplittingofR d into subspaces of distinct exponential growth rates (called Lyapunov exponents). When the lin- ear actions are non-invertible, Oseledets’ MET only yieldsthe existence of a filtrationof subspaces, the elements of which contain all vectors thatgrow no faster than exponential rates given by the Lyapunov exponents. The au- thors recently demonstrated \[G. Froyland, S. Lloyd, and A. Quas,Coherent structures and exceptional spectrum for Perron–Frobeniuscocycles, Ergodic Theory and Dynam. Systems (to appear).\] that a splitting overR d is guar- anteedwithoutthe invertibility assumption on the linear actions. Motivated by applications of the MET to cocycles of (non-invertible) transfer operators arising from random dynamical systems, we demonstrate the existence of an Oseledets splitting for cocycles of quasi-compact non-invertible linear opera- tors on Banach spaces. 1.Introduction Oseledets-type ergodic theorems deal with dynamical systemsσ: Ω→Ω where for eachω∈Ω there is an operator (or in the original Oseledets case a matrix) L ω acting on a linear spaceX. One then studies the properties of the operator L (n) ω =L σ n−1 ω ◦···◦L ω , giving anω-dependent decomposition ofXinto subspaces with a hierarchy of expansion properties. Prior to the previous work of the current authors, \[10\], all of the Oseledets-type theorems in the literature split into two cases according to the hypotheses: the invertible and non-invertible cases. Invertible case:In this case the base dynamical systemσis assumed to be invertible and the operatorsL ω are assumed to be invertible (or in some cases just injective). Integrability conditions may be imposed onkL −1 ω k. The conclusion here is that the spaceXadmits an invariantsplitting E 1 (ω)⊕E 2 (ω)⊕···, finite or countable, possibly with a ‘remainder’ in the infinite-dimensional case. Non-zero vectors inE i (ω) expand exactly at rate λ i . Non-invertible case:In the non-invertible case no assumptions are made about invertibility of the base nor about injectivity of the operators. The weaker conclusion here is thatXadmits an invariantfiltrationV 1 (ω)⊃ V 2 (ω)⊃···such that vectors inV i (ω)\\V i+1 (ω) expand at rateλ i . 1 2GARY FROYLAND, SIMON LLOYD, AND ANTHONY QUAS The conclusion in the invertible case may be seen to be much strongeras one obtains an invariant family of complements toV i+1 (ω) inV i (ω). These are in general finite-dimensional so that one ‘sees the vectors responsible forλ i expansion’. This is of considerable importance in applications. Our principal contribution here is to focus on thesemi-invertiblecase. Here assumptions are made about the invertibility of the base transformation, but there are no assumptions about invertibility or injectivity of the operatorsL ω . In spite of this we are able to show that one can obtain an invariant splitting rather than the weaker invariant filtration, for the setting investigated by Thieullen\[27\] where the random compositions have some quasi-compactness properties. In \[10\] we obtained an analagous result for the original Oseledets setting of matrices acting onR d . 1.1.Set-up.Let (Ω,F,P) be a probability space and (X,k·k) a Banach space. A random dynamical systemis a tupleR= (Ω,F,P, σ, X,L), whereσis an invertible measure-preserving transformation of (Ω,F,P), called thebasetransformation, and L: Ω→L(X, X) is a family of bounded linear maps ofX, called thegenerator. We will later impose suitable measurability conditions onL. For notational convenience, we writeL(ω) asL ω . A random dynamical system defines acocycleN×Ω→L(X, X): (1)(n, ω)7→L (n) ω :=L σ n−1 ω ◦···◦L σω ◦L ω . We define theLyapunov exponent in directionv,λ(ω, v), by (2)λ(ω, v) = lim sup n→∞ 1 n logkL (n) ω vk, ω∈Ω, v∈X. Lyapunov exponents have the following well-known properties. Forallω∈Ω, u, v∈Xandα6= 0: (i)λ(ω,0) =−∞; (ii)λ(ω, αv) =λ(ω, v); (iii)λ(ω, u+v)≤max{λ(ω, u), λ(ω, v)}with equality ifλ(ω, u)6=λ(ω, v); (iv)λ(σω,L ω v) =λ(ω, v). We call the set Λ(ω) ={λ(ω, v) :v∈X}theLyapunov spectrum. Forα∈R, the setV α (ω) :={v∈X:λ(ω, v)≤α}is a linear subspace ofX,L ω V α (ω)⊂ V α (σω) and ifα ′ < α, thenV α ′ (ω)⊂ V α (ω). For eachω∈Ω, the quantityλ(ω) is defined by (3)λ(ω) = lim sup n→∞ 1 n logkL (n) ω k. Definition 1.LetR= (Ω,F,P, σ, X,L) be a random dynamical system. •We say thatRisquasi-compactif for almost everyωthere is anα < λ(ω) such thatV α (ω) is finite co-dimensional. Of particular interest is the infimal αwith this property. We call this quantityα(ω). •For each isolated Lyapunov exponentr∈Λ(ω), letǫ r >0 be small enough that Λ(ω)∩(r−ǫ r , r) =∅. If the codimensiondofV r−ǫ r (ω) inV r (ω) is finite, then we sayris a Lyapunov exponent ofmultiplicityd. •The Lyapunov exponents greater thanα(ω) are said to beexceptional. As they are isolated, the exceptional Lyapunov exponents{λ i (ω)} p(ω) i=1 are either finite in number (p(ω)<∞) or else they are countably infinite (p(ω) =∞), accumulating only atα(ω). We shall always enumerate the A SEMI-INVERTIBLE OSELEDETS THEOREM3 exceptional Lyapunov exponents in decreasing orderλ 1 (ω)> λ 2 (ω)>···. Theexceptional Lyapunov spectrum, EX(R)(ω) ={(λ i (ω), d i (ω))} p(ω) i=1 , con- sists of all exceptional Lyapunov exponents paired with their multiplicities. In the setting wherePis ergodic and the generatorLsatisfies suitable measur- ability conditions,λ(ω) =λ ∗ ,α(ω) =α ∗ and the exceptional Lyapunov spectrum will be independent ofωP-a.e. IfXis a finite dimensional space, thenα(ω) =−∞for eachωand so all Lyapunov exponents are exceptional. Since the setsV α (ω) are subspaces for each α∈R, the number of Lyapunov exponents counted with multiplicity is bounded by the dimension ofX, and so each is isolated and of finite multiplicity. We are interested in Banach space analogues of the multiplicative ergodic the- orem. In order to make sense of this it will be necessary to put a topology on suitable collections of subspaces of Banach spaces. The GrassmannianG(X) of a Banach spaceXis defined to be the set ofcomplementedclosed subspacesEof X(that is, those for which there is a second closed subspaceFwith the property thatX=E⊕F). Since every finite dimensional subspace ofXis closed and complemented, the collection ofd-dimensional subspaces ofXforms a subset of G(X), which we denote byG d (X). Also, finite codimensional subspaces are nec- essarily complemented, so the collection ofclosedc-codimensional subspaces ofX forms a subset ofG(X), which we denote by respectivelyG c (X). More details on the Grassmannian are given in Section 2 along with proofs of some basic theorems concerning Grassmannians that we shall need later. Definition 2.Consider a random dynamical systemR= (Ω,F,P, σ, X,L) with er- godic base, and supposeRis quasi-compact with exceptional spectrum{(λ i , d i )} p i=1 (where 1≤p≤∞). ALyapunov filtrationforRis a collection of maps (V i : Ω→ G c i (X)) p i=1 , such that for allωin a full measureσ-invariant subset Ω ′ ⊂Ω and for eachi= 1, . . . , p: (1)X=V 1 (ω)⊃···⊃V i (ω)⊃V i+1 (ω); (2)V α(ω) (ω)⊆ ⋂ p i=1 V i (ω) with equality if and only ifp=∞; (3)L ω V i (ω) =V i (σω); (4)λ(ω, v) = lim n→∞ (1/n) logkL (n) ω vk=λ i if and only ifv∈V i (ω)\\V i+1 (ω), where we setV p+1 (ω) :=V α(ω) (ω) ifp <∞. AnOseledets splittingforRis a Lyapunov filtration (V i : Ω→G c i (X)) p i=1 together with an additional collection of maps (E i : Ω→ G d i (X)) p i=1 (withd i =c i+1 −c i ), calledOseledets subspaces, such that for allωin a full measureσ-invariant subset Ω ′ ⊂Ω and for eachi= 1, . . . , p: (5)V i (ω) =E i (ω)⊕V i+1 (ω); (6)L ω E i (ω) =E i (σω); (7)λ(ω, v) = lim n→∞ (1/n) logkL (n) ω vk=λ i ifv∈E i (ω)\\{0}. We say a Lyapunov filtration is measurable if the mapsV i : Ω→ G c i (X) are measurable with respect to the Borelσ-algebra onG(X) for each 1≤i≤p, where the topology will be defined in the next section. We say an Oseledets splitting is measurable if, in addition, the mapsE i : Ω→G d i (X) are measurable. 1.2.Multiplicative Ergodic Theorems.The first result on the existence of Lya- punov filtrations and Oseledets splittings in the finite dimensional setting is the Multiplicative Ergodic Theorem of Oseledets. Throughout, we definelog + (x) = max{0,logx}. 4GARY FROYLAND, SIMON LLOYD, AND ANTHONY QUAS Theorem 3(Oseledets \[22\]).LetR= (Ω,F,P, σ,R d ,L)be a random dynami- cal system with ergodic base, and suppose that the generatorLis measurable and ∫ log + kL ω kdP<+∞. ThenRadmits a measurable Lyapunov filtration. Moreover, if the base is invertible,L ω is invertible a. e. and ∫ log + kL ±1 ω kdP< +∞, thenRadmits a measurable Oseledets splitting. This situation may be summarized by saying that Oseledets splittings can be found when the base is invertible and the linear actions in the cocycle are invertible with bounded inverses, whereas in the non-invertible linear action cases the theorem only guarantees a Lyapunov filtration. This situation persisted in allsubsequent versions \[24, 19, 27\] and extensions of the Oseledets theorem, toour knowledge, until the result stated below by the current authors which obtained a Oseledets splitting in thesemi-invertiblecase where the base is invertible but the operators themselves are not assumed to be invertible (or they are invertible but there is no bound on the logarithmic norms of their inverses). Theorem 4(Froyland, Lloyd and Quas \[10\]).LetR= (Ω,F,P, σ,R d ,L)be a ran- dom dynamical system with an invertible ergodic base, and supposeLis measurable and ∫ log + kL ω kdP<+∞. ThenRadmits a measurable Oseledets splitting. Remark5.It is natural to ask whether one can obtain an invariant splitting in the absence of invertibility of either the base or the operators. Insection 3.3 we show that if the base is non-invertible then even in the case where the operators are invertible one cannot in general obtain an invariant splitting. The result of Oseledets has been extended by many authors. Of particular relevance to us are the result of Ruelle \[24\] dealing with the case whereXis a Hilbert space and the result of Ma ̃n ́e \[19\] on random dynamical systems of compact operators in Banach spaces. This was subsequently extended to the quasi-compact case by Thieullen \[27\]. Thieullen’s result will be stated precisely in Section3. A key requirement for Thieullen’s extension is that the dependence of theoperatorL ω on ωis required to beP-continuous (the definition follows in Section 3) and it is upon this that we build. It should be pointed out that this is a significant limitation as many natural random dynamical systems fail to satisfy this condition (e.g. ifT ω is a family of Lasota–Yorke maps, it is almost never the case that their Perron– Frobenius operators depend in aP-continuous way onω). A parallel approach was taken in the recent thesis of Lian \[17\] where the measurability condition is relaxed to the weaker ‘strongly measurable’ condition (meaning that for each fixedx∈X, the mapω7→L ω xis measurable). The cost (which is again heavy from the point of view of applications) is that in order to obtain suitable measurability Lian imposes the condition that the Banach spaceXbe separable. Our main theorem is related to Thieullen’s theorem in exactly the way that our theorem from \[10\] is related to Oseledets’ Theorem: it provides an Oseledets splitting for the category of a quasi-compact linear action in the semi-invertible case where the base is invertible without any invertibility assumptions on the operators. We include the statement here, but defer some relevant definitionsto section 3. Main Theorem(Theorem 17).LetΩbe a Borel subset of a separable complete metric space,Fthe Borel sigma-algebra andPa Borel probabilty. LetXbe a Banach space and consider a random dynamical systemR= (Ω,F,P, σ, X,L)with base transformationσ: Ω→Ωan ergodic homeomorphism, and suppose that the A SEMI-INVERTIBLE OSELEDETS THEOREM5 generatorL: Ω→L(X, X)isP-continuous and satisfies ∫ log + kL ω kdP<+∞. Ifκ(ω)< λ(ω)(whereκis the “index of compactness” ofL) for almost everyω, thenRis quasi-compact and admits a uniqueP-continuous Oseledets splitting. 1.3.Overview.An outline of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we prove some basic results concerning Grassmanians. In Section 3 we describe the result of Thieullen \[27\] and introduce the key notions ofP-continuity and index of com- pactness from that work. We then prove our main result. Section 4describes two applications of our main result: Perron–Frobenius cocycles generated by random “Rychlik” maps (generalisations of Lasota–Yorke maps), and transfer operator co- cycles generated by subshifts of finite type with random weight functions. 2.The Grassmannian of a Banach Space LetXbe a Banach space and suppose thatE, F⊂Xare subspaces forming a direct (algebraic) sum: that is,E+F=XandE∩F={0}. This decomposition specifies a linear map Pr FE (e+f) =fwith rangeFand kernelE, called the projection ontoFalongE. Conversely, anyprojectionP:X→X(that is, a linear map satisfyingP 2 =P) determines a decompositionX= ker(P) + ran(P), where ker(P)∩ran(P) ={0}. Unlike in finite dimensions, not all projections in infinite-dimensional Banach spaces are continuous. A necessary (and sufficient) condition fora projection to be continuous is that it has a closed range. Since every continuous linear map has a closed kernel, it follows that everycontinuousprojection determines atopological direct sum: a direct sum decomposition into complementaryclosedsubspaces. We denote the topological direct sum of subspacesE, F⊂XbyE⊕F. Conversely, it follows from the Closed Graph Theorem that ifE⊂Xis a closed subspace with a closed complementary subspaceF⊂X, then Pr FE is continuous. As mentioned before the Grassmannian ofX, denotedG(X), is the collection of complemented closed subspaces ofX. The setG(X) admits a Banach manifold structure as follows. GivenE 0 ∈G(X), fix anyF 0 ∈G(X) for whichE 0 ⊕F 0 =X. We can useF 0 to define a neighbourhood ofE 0 : we setU F 0 ={E∈ G(X) : E⊕F 0 =X}. We then define an isomorphismφ E 0 ,F 0 fromU F 0 to the Banach spaceL(E 0 , F 0 ) byφ E 0 ,F 0 (E) = Pr F 0 E |E 0 . The triples{U F 0 , φ E 0 ,F 0 , L(E 0 , F 0 )} form an atlas forG(X) showing that nearE 0 ,G(X) is locally modelled onL(E 0 , F 0 ). The (E 0 , F 0 )-local normonU F 0 is defined by (4)kEk (E 0 ,F 0 ) :=kPr F 0 E | E 0 k. We now prove some basic properties of the GrassmannianG(X). Lemma 6.LetXbe a Banach space and letΩbe a topological space. Suppose that for eachω∈Ωthere are closed subspacesV(ω)andW(ω)whose topological direct sum isX. Suppose further thatV(ω)andW(ω)depend continuously onω. LetR(ω) = Pr V(ω)W(ω) be the projection ofXontoV(ω)alongW(ω). Then the mappingω7→R(ω)is continuous (with respect to the operator norm onL(X, X)). Proof.Letω 0 ∈Ω. SinceV(ω) andW(ω) are continuous families of subspaces, there exists a neighbourhoodN 1 ofω 0 such that for allω∈N 1 ,V(ω)⊕W(ω 0 ) =X andV(ω 0 )⊕W(ω) =X. 6GARY FROYLAND, SIMON LLOYD, AND ANTHONY QUAS SinceX=V(ω 0 )⊕W(ω 0 ), bothkPr V(ω 0 )W(ω 0 ) kandkPr W(ω 0 )V(ω 0 ) kare finite. LetCbe the greater of the two. Given anyǫ >0, sinceV(ω) andW(ω) are continuous there is a neighbourhood N 2 ofω 0 contained inN 1 such that forω∈N 2 one has kPr W(ω 0 )V(ω) | V(ω 0 ) k< ǫ; and kPr V(ω 0 )W(ω) | W(ω 0 ) k< ǫ. Letxbe inX. We now havex= Pr V(ω)W(ω) (x) + Pr W(ω)V(ω) (x). Write the right side asx 1 +x 2 . Now we splitx 1 andx 2 into parts lying inV(ω 0 ) and W(ω 0 ) asx 1 =x 11 +x 12 andx 2 =x 21 +x 22 so thatx=x 11 +x 12 +x 21 + x 22 = (x 11 +x 21 ) + (x 12 +x 22 ). We have Pr V(ω)W(ω) (x) =x 1 =x 11 +x 12 and Pr V(ω 0 )W(ω 0 ) (x) =x 11 +x 21 so that the difference isx 12 −x 21 . Rearranging we havex 22 =x 2 −x 21 so that−x 21 = Pr V(ω 0 )W(ω) (x 22 ) so that kx 21 k< ǫkx 22 k. Similarlykx 12 k< ǫkx 11 k. We havekx 11 +x 21 k=kPr V(ω 0 )W(ω 0 ) (x)k ≤Ckxkso thatkx 11 k ≤Ckxk+ kx 21 k< Ckxk+ǫkx 22 kand similarlykx 22 k< Ckxk+ǫkx 11 k. Summing and rearranging we obtainkx 11 k+kx 22 k<2C/(1−ǫ)kxk. From the previous equations we obtainkR(ω)(x)−R(ω 0 )(x)k ≤ kx 12 k+kx 21 k<2Cǫ/(1−ǫ)kxk. Sinceǫmay be chosen arbitrarily small, this establishes continuity ofRatω 0 . Lemma 7.LetR: Ω→L(X, X)andE: Ω→ G(X)be continuous. Thenω7→ kR(ω)| E(ω) kis continuous. Proof.Letǫ >0 and letω 0 ∈Ω. Choose aδ >0 such thatδ+2δkR(ω 0 )k/(1−δ)< ǫ and 2δkR(ω 0 )k+δ < ǫ. Fix anF 0 such thatE(ω 0 )⊕F 0 =X. Choose a neighbourhoodNofω 0 such that forω∈N,E(ω)⊕F 0 =X,kPr F 0 E(ω) | E(ω 0 ) k< δandkR(ω)−R(ω 0 )k< δ. Letx∈ B E(ω) , the closed unit ball ofE(ω). SinceE(ω 0 )⊕F 0 =X,xmay be expressed uniquely asa+bwitha∈E(ω 0 ) andb∈F 0 . We havea=x−bso that Pr F 0 E(ω) (a) =−byieldingkbk< δkak. We havekak ≤ kxk+kbkso that kak<1/(1−δ). We now have kR(ω)xk−kR(ω 0 )((1−δ)a)k ≤kR(ω)x−R(ω 0 )((1−δ)a)k ≤kR(ω)x−R(ω 0 )xk+kR(ω 0 )(x−(1−δ)a)k ≤kR(ω)−R(ω 0 )k·kxk+kR(ω 0 )k·kb+δak ≤δ+ 2δkR(ω 0 )k/(1−δ)≤ǫ. It follows thatkR(ω)| E(ω) k<kR(ω 0 )| E(ω 0 ) k+ǫ. Conversely letx∈B E(ω 0 ) . We havex= Pr F 0 E(ω) x+ Pr E(ω)F 0 x, which we write asc+d. By assumptionkck< δso thatkdk<1 +δ. We have kR(ω 0 )xk−kR(ω)d/(1 +δ)k ≤kR(ω 0 )x−R(ω)d/(1 +δ)k ≤kR(ω 0 )x−R(ω 0 )d/(1 +δ)k+kR(ω 0 )d/(1 +δ)−R(ω)d/(1 +δ)k ≤kR(ω 0 )k·kx−d+δd/(1 +δ)k+kR(ω 0 )−R(ω)k·kd/(1 +δ)k ≤2δkR(ω 0 )k+δ < ǫ. A SEMI-INVERTIBLE OSELEDETS THEOREM7 It follows thatkR(ω 0 )| E(ω 0 ) k<kR(ω)| E(ω) k+ǫ, which establishes the required continuity. Lemma 8.Suppose that the mapV: Ω→ G(X)is continuous and that there are elementsE 0 andF 0 of the Grassmannian such thatV(ω 0 )⊕E 0 ⊕F 0 =X. Then there is a neighbourhoodNofω 0 such that onN,ω7→V(ω)⊕F 0 is continuous. Proof.SinceE 0 ⊕F 0 is a topological complementary subspace ofV(ω 0 ), by conti- nuity there is a neighbourhoodN 1 ofωsuch that forω∈N 1 ,V(ω)⊕E 0 ⊕F 0 =X. In particular we see thatE 0 is a topological complementary subspace toV(ω)⊕F 0 forω∈N 1 . Letω 1 ∈N 1 be fixed. We need to establish that forωsufficiently close toω 1 ,kPr E 0 V(ω)⊕F 0 | V(ω 1 )⊕F 0 kis small. We demonstrate this by writing the operator as the composition of three parts: two of them boundedand the third one small. Letǫ >0. We note that Pr E 0 V(ω)⊕F 0 | F 0 is zero so that we can rewrite Pr E 0 V(ω)⊕F 0 | V(ω 1 )⊕F 0 as Pr E 0 V(ω)⊕F 0 | V(ω 1 ) ◦Pr V(ω 1 )F 0 . We further decompose Pr E 0 V(ω)⊕F 0 as Pr E 0 F 0 ◦Pr E 0 ⊕F 0 V(ω) so that Pr E 0 V(ω)⊕F 0 | V(ω 1 )⊕F 0 = Pr E 0 F 0 ◦Pr E 0 ⊕F 0 V(ω) | V(ω 1 ) ◦Pr V(ω 1 )F 0 . SinceV(ω 1 )⊕F 0 andE 0 ⊕F 0 are topological direct sums it follows thatC= kPr V(ω 1 )F 0 kandC ′ =kPr E 0 F 0 kare finite. By continuity ofV(ω) there is a neighbourhoodN 2 ofω 1 on whichkPr E 0 ⊕F 0 V(ω) | V(ω 1 ) k< ǫ/(CC ′ ). Multiplying the norms we see that forω∈N 2 ,kPr E 0 V(ω)⊕F 0 k< ǫas required. Lemma 9.Let the mapsV: Ω→ G d (X)andW: Ω→ G d ′ (X)be continuous and suppose thatV(ω)∩W(ω) ={0}for eachω∈Ω. Then the mapω7→V(ω)⊕W(ω) is continuous. Proof.Fixω 0 ∈Ω. LetF 0 be a topological complement ofV(ω 0 )⊕W(ω 0 ) (this exists as all finite-dimensional subspaces have a topological complement). In order to demonstrate continuity we need to show that Pr F 0 V(ω)⊕W(ω) | V(ω 0 )⊕W(ω 0 ) has small norm. SinceV(ω 0 )⊕W(ω 0 ) is a topological direct sum it is sufficient to show that Pr F 0 V(ω)⊕W(ω) | V(ω 0 ) is of small norm with a similar result for the restriction toW(ω 0 ). We write Pr F 0 V(ω)⊕W(ω) | V(ω 0 ) = Pr F 0 W(ω) ◦Pr F 0 ⊕W(ω)V(ω) | V(ω 0 ) . We have from Lemmas 6 and 8 thatω7→Pr F 0 ⊕W(ω)V(ω) is continuous in a neighbourhood ofω 0 and from Lemma 7 thatω7→ kPr F 0 +W(ω)V(ω) | V(ω 0 ) kis continuous on this neighbourhood. SincekPr F 0 +W(ω)V(ω) | V(ω 0 ) k= 0 whenω= ω 0 , it follows that this norm is arbitrarily small forωin a neighbourhood ofω 0 . It remains to show thatkPr F 0 W(ω) kremains bounded on a neighbourhood of ω 0 . To see this we note from Lemma 6 that Pr F 0 ⊕V(ω 0 )W(ω) is continuous on a neighbourhood ofω 0 and Pr F 0 V(ω 0 ) is a bounded operator sinceF 0 ⊕V(ω 0 ) is a topological direct sum. Composing these two operators gives the required result. Lemma 10.LetXbe a Banach space,Ka compact metrizable space and let E:K→G d (X)be a continuous map. LetPbe a finite measure onK. Then there exists an open and dense measurable subsetUofKwith fullP-measure and maps e 1 , . . . , e d :K→Xwithe i |Ucontinuous,i= 1, . . . , dsuch that for eachω∈U, e 1 (ω), . . . , e d (ω)is a basis forE(ω). 8GARY FROYLAND, SIMON LLOYD, AND ANTHONY QUAS Furthermore, the basis can be chosen so that for eachω∈Uand alla∈R d , kak 2 ≤ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ d ∑ i=1 a i e i (ω) ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ≤4 √ dkak 2 . Proof.Givenω 0 ∈K, there existsF ω 0 ∈ G d (X) such thatE(ω 0 )⊕F ω 0 =X. By continuity ofE(ω), there exists an open neighourhoodU ω 0 ofω 0 such that E(ω)⊕F ω 0 =Xfor allω∈U ω 0 . By a theorem of F. John (see \[5, Chapter 4 Theorem 15\] for example), there exists a basisv 1 , . . . , v d forE(ω 0 ) satisfying 2kak 2 ≤ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ d ∑ i=1 a i v i ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ≤2 √ dkak 2 ,(5) for alla∈R d , wherekak 2 = ( ∑ d i=1 a 2 i ) 1/2 is the Euclidean norm onR d . Define e ω 0 i :U ω 0 →Xfor eachi= 1, . . . , d, by settinge ω 0 i (ω) = Pr E(ω)F ω 0 v i . Notice that these vectors depend continuously onωby Lemma 6. ReplacingU ω 0 by a smaller neighbourhood ofω 0 if necessary, we may assume that for allω∈U ω 0 anda∈R d , kak 2 ≤ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ d ∑ i=1 a i e ω 0 i (ω) ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ≤4 √ dkak 2 . It follows that the vectors are linearly independent and hence forma basis forE(ω). We have that{U ω :ω∈K}is an open cover ofK. Letρbe a metric onK compatible with the topology and letδ >0 be the Lebesgue number of the cover: that is, for every 0< r < δandω∈K, there existsω ′ ∈Ω such thatB r (ω), the open ball of radiusrcentred atω, is contained inU ω ′ . Fix 0< r 0 < δand consider the open cover{B r 0 (ω) :ω∈K}ofK. By compactness, we have a finite subcover {B r 0 (ω i ) :i= 1, . . . , k}. For eachi= 1, . . . , k, the collection{∂B r (ω i ) :r 0 < r < δ} is an uncountable family of pairwise disjoint sets (contained in the sphere of radius raboutω i ), and so there existsr∈(r 0 , δ) such thatP(∂B r (ω i )) = 0 for eachi. We have that{B i :=B r (ω i ) :i= 1, . . . , k}is a cover ofKby open sets whose boundaries have zeroP-measure. These sets have the additional property that for eachi= 1, . . . , k, there existsω ′ i ∈Ksuch thatB i ⊂U ω ′ i . SetD i =B i \\ ⋃ j<i B j and letU= ⋃ k i=1 int(D i ). SinceK\\U⊂ ⋃ k i=1 ∂B i ,Uis an open dense set of full P-measure and{D i :i= 1, . . . , k}is a partition ofK. Settinge i (ω) =e ω ′ j i (ω) forω∈D j , for eachi= 1, . . . , dandj= 1, . . . , kgives maps with the required properties. 3.Oseledets splitting Thieullen \[27\] in his work on multiplicative ergodic theorems for operators in- troduced a framework on which this paper will be based. A key notionintroduced in that paper isP-continuity. Definition 11.For a topological space Ω, equipped with a Borel probabilityP, a mappingffrom Ω to a topological spaceYis said to beP-continuousif Ω can be expressed as a countable union of Borel sets such that the restriction offto each is continuous. Remark12.As noted in \[27\], if Ω is homeomorphic to a Borel subset of a separable complete metric space, then a functionf: Ω→YisP-continuous if and only if A SEMI-INVERTIBLE OSELEDETS THEOREM9 there exists a sequence (K n ) n≥0 of pairwise disjoint compact subsets ofXsuch that μ( ⋃ n≥0 K n ) = 1 and the restrictionf| K n is continuous for eachn≥0. We shall call a Lyapunov filtration or Oseledets splittingP-continuous if all of the exponents and all maps into the Grassmannian areP-continuous (with respect to the topology defined in Section 2 in the case of maps into the Grassmannian). Remark13.IfPis aRadonmeasure on Ω (that is, locally finite and tight) andYis a metric space, then a mapf: Ω→YisP-continuous if and only if it is measurable (see \[9\]). In particular, this is the case in the ‘Polish noise’ setting (see, for example, \[15, 1\]), where Ω is a separable topological space with a complete metric,Fis the Borel sigma-algebra andPis any Borel probability. Consider a random dynamical systemR= (Ω,F,P, σ, X,L). Ifσis invertible with a measurable inverse, we sayRhas aninvertible base. If Ω is a Borel subset of a complete separable metric space,Fis the Borel sigma-algebra andσis continuous (or a homeomorphism), we sayRhas acontinuous (or homeomorphic) base. SupposeRis a random dynamical system with a homeomorphic base. Provided ω7→ L ω isP-continuous we see thatω7→ kL (n) ω kisP-continuous and henceF- measurable. We shall assume throughout that ∫ log + kL ω kdP(ω)<∞. Since logkL (n) ω kis a subadditive sequence of functions it follows from the subadditive ergodic theorem that for almost everyω, 1 n logkL (n) ω kis convergent and hence the quantityλ(ω) defined in (3) may be re-expressed as λ(ω) = lim n→∞ (1/n) logkL (n) ω k. The boundedness of ∫ log + kL ω kdP(ω) ensures thatλ(ω) is finiteP-almost every- where. Proposition 14.For eachω∈Ω, we havesup Λ(ω) =λ(ω). Proof.Clearly sup Λ(ω)≤λ(ω), so we show that sup Λ(ω)≥λ(ω). Fixω∈Ω, let r >sup v∈X λ(ω, v). SetA N ={v∈X:kL (n) ω vk ≤N e nr ,∀n∈N}. The setA N is closed, and by the choice ofr, we have ⋃ N∈N A N =Xfor eachω∈Ω. Thus by the Baire Category Theorem, there exists anA N containing an interior pointu. Let δ >0 be small enough thatB δ (u)⊂A N . For anyv∈B δ (0) andn >0, we have kL (n) ω vk ≤ kL (n) ω (v−u)k+kL (n) ω uk. SokL (n) ω k ≤(2N/δ)e nr , and henceλ(ω)≤r. Sinceris an arbitrary quantity greater than Λ(ω), the result follows. We concentrate on the setting in whichσis ergodic. The functionλ(ω) is then constant along orbits, and thus essentially constant. We denote byλ ∗ ∈Rthe constant satisfyingλ(ω) =λ ∗ for almost everyω∈Ω. A second key concept introduced by Thieullen is that of the index of compactness of a random composition of operators. For a bounded operatorA,kAk ic is defined to be the infimalrsuch thatA(B X ) may be covered by a finite number ofr-balls, whereB X is the unit ball inX. We havekAA ′ k ic ≤ kAk ic kA ′ k ic for any bounded linear operators onX. One can check that|kAk ic −kA ′ k ic |≤kA−A ′ kso thatkAk ic is a continuous function of the operator. In particular for eachn,ω7→kL n ω k ic isP- continuous and henceF-measurable. By sub-additivity we have (1/n) logkL (n) ω k ic is convergent. 10GARY FROYLAND, SIMON LLOYD, AND ANTHONY QUAS Definition 15.The limitκ(ω) := lim n→∞ (1/n) logkL (n) ω k ic is called theindex of compactnessof the random composition of operators. Sinceκ(ω) isσ-invariant it is equal almost everywhere to a constant which we callκ ∗ . Theorem 16(Thieullen \[27\]).LetR= (Ω,F,P, σ, X,L)be a random dynamical system with an ergodic continuous base, and supposeω7→L ω isP-continuous, and that ∫ log + kL ω kdP<+∞. Ifκ ∗ < λ ∗ , thenRis quasi-compact, withα(ω) =κ ∗ a. e., and admits aP-continuous Lyapunov filtration. Moreover, if the base is invertible andL ω is injective a. e., thenRadmits a P-continuous Oseledets splitting. Our main result in this article is the extension of Thieullen’s theorem to show that one obtains an Oseledets splitting in Thieullen’s setting without making the assumption of invertibility of theL ω . Theorem 17.LetΩbe a Borel subset of a separable complete metric space,F the Borel sigma-algebra andPa Borel probabilty. LetXbe a Banach space and consider a random dynamical systemR= (Ω,F,P, σ, X,L)with base transfor- mationσ: Ω→Ωan ergodic homeomorphism, and suppose that the generator L: Ω→L(X, X)isP-continuous and satisfies ∫ log + kL ω kdP<+∞. Ifκ ∗ < λ ∗ for almost everyω, thenRis quasi-compact and admits a uniqueP- continuous Oseledets splitting. The proof of this theorem (which makes extensive use of Theorem 16) is given in the next two subsections, in which existence and uniqueness of the Oseledets splitting, respectively, are proved. 3.1.Existence of an Oseledets splitting.Consider a random dynamical sys- temR= (Ω,F,P, σ, X,L) with an ergodic homeomorphic base. SupposeLis P-continuous and ∫ log + kL ω kdP<+∞. Let EX(R) ={(λ i , d i )} p i=1 be the excep- tional Lyapunov spectrum ofR, and (V i : Ω→G ∞ (X)) p i=1 the Lyapunov filtration. Following Thieullen, we construct an extension Banach space ̃ X, and a new generator ̃ L: Ω→L( ̃ X, ̃ X) whose cocycle retains all the dynamical information of the original system but has the advantage that ̃ L ω is injective. The extended random dynamical system ̃ R= (Ω,F,P, σ, ̃ X, ̃ L) is defined as follows: ̃ X={(v n ) ∞ n=0 :∀n, v n ∈X,sup n kv n k<∞}, ̃ L ω (v 0 , v 1 , v 2 , . . .) = (L ω v 0 , α 0 v 0 , α 1 v 1 , α 2 v 2 , . . .), for a positive sequence (α n ) ∞ n=0 decaying to zero. We endow ̃ Xwith the norm k ̃vk ̃ X = sup n kv n k X where ̃v= (v n ) ∞ n=0 . Every ̃ L ω is injective on ̃ X. In Thieullen’s article sufficient conditions on the speed of decay of the sequence (α n ) are given to ensure that the indices of compactness of ̃ RandRare equal ( ̃κ ∗ =κ ∗ ) and that ̃ λ ∗ =λ ∗ . In fact we check in Subsection 3.4 that this holds for any sequence(α n ) of positive numbers tending to 0. Providedκ ∗ < λ ∗ , we may apply the invertible form of Thieullen’s Theorem to ̃ Rto obtain theσ-invariant subset Ω ′ ⊂Ω,P(Ω ′ ) = 1,P-continuous Lyapunov A SEMI-INVERTIBLE OSELEDETS THEOREM11 filtration ( ̃ V i : Ω→ G ∞ ( ̃ X)) p i=1 and Oseledets subspaces ( ̃ E i : Ω→ G ∞ ( ̃ X)) p i=1 . We denote by ̃ λ(ω, v) := lim n→∞ logk ̃ L (n) ω ̃vkthe Lyapunov exponents for ̃ R. Letπ: ̃ X→Xdenote the (continuous) mapping onto the zeroth coordinate. We haveL◦π=π◦ ̃ L. Thieullen proves that for allω∈Ω ′ and ̃v∈ ̃ X,λ(ω, π( ̃v)) = ̃ λ(ω, ̃v), and thatRand ̃ Rhave the same expectional exponents. He then defines V i (ω) =π( ̃ V i (ω)) and proves that the (V i : Ω→ G ∞ (X)) p i=1 form a Lyapunov filtration for the one-sided system. For each 1≤i≤p, we defineE i (ω) =π ̃ E i (ω). As the linear image of a finite dimensional space,E i (ω) is a closed subspace. We now demonstrate that (E i : Ω→G(X)) p i=1 is the splitting we seek. Claim 18.The maps(E i : Ω→G(X)) p i=1 form aP-continuous Oseledets splitting forR= (Ω,F,P, σ, X,L). Proof.Letv∈V i+1 (ω)∩E i (ω). Thenv=π( ̃v) with ̃v∈ ̃ V i+1 (ω) so thatλ(ω, v) = ̃ λ(ω, ̃v)≤λ i+1 . On the other hand ifv6= 0, thenv=π( ̃v ′ ) for some ̃v ′ ∈ ̃ E i (ω)\\{0}. In this case we obtainλ(ω, v) = ̃ λ(ω, ̃v ′ ) =λ i . Since this contradicts the fact that λ(ω, v)≤λ i+1 it follows thatV i+1 (ω)∩E i (ω) ={0}. Since ̃ V i (ω) = ̃ V i+1 (ω)+ ̃ E i (ω), anyv∈V i (ω) can be written asu+wwithu∈V i+1 (ω) andw∈E i (ω). By the triviality of the intersection this decomposition is unique. Since both spaces are closed (V i+1 (ω) by Thieullen’s theorem andE i (ω) by finiteness of dimension) we obtainV i (ω) =V i+1 (ω)⊕E i (ω). We now show that dimE i (ω) = dim ̃ E i (ω). If ̃v∈ ̃ Xsatisfiesπ( ̃v) = 0, then ̃ λ(ω, ̃v) =−∞, and so ker(π)∩ ̃ E i (ω) ={0}. SinceE i (ω) =π( ̃ E i (ω)), we see that dimE i (ω)≤dim ̃ E i (ω). Suppose the subspace ̃ E i (ω) isk-dimensional and can be written as ̃ E i (ω) =h ̃v 1 , . . . , ̃v k i. Thenhv i 0 :=π( ̃v i ) :i= 1, . . . , ki=E i (ω). If we hadc 1 v 1 0 +···+c k v k 0 = 0 for somec∈R k \\{0}, then we would havec 1 ̃v 1 +···c k ̃v k ∈ ker(π)∩ ̃ E i (ω) ={0}, contradicting linear independence of the ̃v 1 , . . . , ̃v k . Hence, v 1 0 , . . . , v k 0 , are also linearly independent, and sod i = dimE i (ω) = dim ̃ E i (ω). We end by proving theP-continuity of the subspacesE i . Since the function ̃ E i : Ω→ G d i ( ̃ X) isP-continuous, there exists a sequence (K n ) n≥0 of pairwise disjoint compact subsets of Ω such thatP( ⋃ n≥0 K n ) = 1 and ̃ E i | K n is continuous for eachn≥0. By Lemma 10, for eachn≥0 there exists an open and dense subsetU n ⊂K n ,P(U n ) =P(K n ) and continuous functions ̃e i,n j :U n → ̃ X,j= 1, . . . , d i , with ̃e i,n 1 (ω), . . . , ̃e i,n d i (ω) forming a basis for ̃ E i (ω) for eachω∈U n . Since π: ̃ X→Xis continuous, the functionse i,n j :=π◦ ̃e i,n j :U n →Xare continuous, ande i,n 1 (ω), . . . , e i,n d i (ω) forms a basis forE i (ω) as shown above. Take functions e i j : Ω→X,j= 1, . . . , d i , satisfyinge i j (ω) =e i,n 1 (ω) forω∈U n ,n≥0. Applying Lemma 9 inductively we see thatω7→ he i 1 (ω), . . . , e i d i (ω)i ∈ G d i (X) is continuous onU n , for eachn≥0 and soP-continuous on Ω, which shows thatE i : Ω→G d i (X) isP-continuous. 3.2.Uniqueness of the Oseledets splitting.ConsiderR= (Ω,F,P, σ, X,L), a quasi-compact random dynamical system, and assume thatσis ergodic and ∫ log + kL ω kdP(ω)<∞. Let EX(R) ={(λ i , d i )} p i=1 be the exceptional Lyapunov spectrum, (V i : Ω→G c i (X)) p i=1 the Lyapunov filtration and (E i : Ω→G d i (X)) p i=1 the Oseledets subspaces constructed above. 12GARY FROYLAND, SIMON LLOYD, AND ANTHONY QUAS The following lemma gives us exponential uniformity in a finite-dimensional sub- space all of whose Lyapunov exponents are equal. A result of this type first ap- peared in the Euclidean case in a paper of Barreira and Silva \[4\] (see also \[10\] for an independent proof). The proof here follows by choosing a suitable basis. Lemma 19.LetB: Ω→L(X, X)be aP-continuous family of operators and letE: Ω→ G d (X)beP-continuous. Suppose thatB(ω)mapsE(ω)bijectively to E(σω). If for almost everyω,lim n→∞ (1/n) logkB (n) ω vk→λfor allv∈E(ω)\\{0} (i.e. if all Lyapunov exponents ofBare equal toλ) then lim n→∞ 1 n log inf x∈S E(ω) kB (n) ω xk= lim n→∞ 1 n log sup x∈S E(ω) kB (n) ω xk=λ, whereS E(ω) denotes the unit sphere{x∈E(ω) :kxk= 1}. Proof.By Lemma 10, sinceE: Ω→G d (X) isP-continuous, we haveP-continuous functionsf i : Ω→Xsatisfying (6)kak 2 ≤ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ d ∑ i=1 a i f i (ω) ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ≤4 √ dkak 2 , wherek·k 2 represents the Euclidean norm onR d . LetA(ω) :R d →E(ω) be the map given byA(ω)a= ∑ d i=1 a i f i (ω). By (6) we havekak 2 ≤kA(ω)ak≤4 √ dkak 2 . The linear mapAis invertible a. e. and satisfies 1/(4 √ d)kvk≤ kA(ω) −1 vk 2 ≤ kvk forv∈E(ω). We have a cocycleτonR d given byτ (n) (ω) :=A(σ n ω) −1 B (n) ω A(ω). Ifa∈R d , then kτ (n) (ω)ak 2 ≤kA(σ n ω) −1 k·kB (n) ω A(ω)ak ≤kB (n) ω (A(ω)a)kand kτ (n) (ω)ak 2 ≥kB (n) ω (A(ω)a)k/kA(σ n ω)k ≥ 1 4 √ d kB (n) ω (A(ω)a)k. SinceA(ω) is a bijection, it follows that lim n→∞ (1/n) logkτ (n) (ω)ak 2 =λ i for each a∈R d \\{0}. Applying the theorem of Barreira and Silva \[4, Theorem 2\] (or see \[10, Proof of Theorem 4.1\] ), we have that lim n→∞ (1/n) log inf{kτ (n) (ω)ak 2 :a∈R d ,kak 2 = 1} = lim n→∞ (1/n) log sup{kτ (n) (ω)ak 2 :a∈R d ,kak 2 = 1}=λ. Reusing the above inequalities the proof of the Lemma is complete. A sequence (v n ) n∈Z is called afull orbitatω∈Ω ifL(σ n ω)v n =v n+1 for all n∈Z. For full orbits, we may consider growth rates asn→−∞. Lemma 20.Let(v n ) n∈Z ⊂Xbe a full orbit forω∈Ω ′ and supposev n ∈V i (σ n ω) for alln∈Z. Then lim inf n→∞ (1/n) logkv −n k≥−λ i . If we havev n ∈E i (σ n ω)for alln∈Z, then we have the stronger statement lim n→∞ (1/n) logkv −n k=−λ i . A SEMI-INVERTIBLE OSELEDETS THEOREM13 Proof.We have lim n→∞ (1/n) logkL (n) ω |V i (ω)k=λ i , and by \[10, Lemma 8.2\], it follows that lim n→∞ (1/n) logkL (n) (σ −n ω)|V i (σ −n ω)k=λ i . Thus for any full orbit {v n } n∈Z satisfying 06=v n ∈V i (σ n ω) for alln∈Z, we have lim sup n→∞ (1/n) log(kL (n) (σ −n ω)v −n k/kv −n k)≤λ i .(7) Thus lim inf n→∞ 1 n logkv −n k=−lim sup n→∞ 1 n log kv 0 k kv −n k =−lim sup n→∞ 1 n log kL (n) (σ −n ω)v −n k kv −n k ≥−λ i . For the second statement we shall assume thatv n ∈E i (σ n ω) for alln∈Z. The mappingL ω |E i (ω) is a bijection, so we denote byS(ω) :E i (σω)→E i (ω) the inverse map. We letS (n) (ω) :=S(σ −n ω)···S(σ −1 ω) = \[L (n) σ −n ω | E i (σ −n ω) \] −1 denote the cocycle for the mapσ −1 generated byS. As logkS (n) (ω)kis a subadditive sequence of functions overσ −1 , using \[10, Lemma 8.2\] again we have lim n→∞ 1 n logkS (n) (ω)k= lim n→∞ 1 n logkS (n) (σ n ω)k =−lim n→∞ 1 n log inf 06=v∈E i (ω) kL (n) ω vk kvk =−λ i , where the last equality follows from Lemma 19. Suppose now that 06=v n ∈ E i (σ n ω) for alln∈Z. Then we have lim sup n→∞ 1 n logkv −n k= lim sup n→∞ 1 n log kS (n) (ω)v 0 k kv 0 k ≤−λ i .  Claim 21.TheP-continuous Oseledets splitting is unique on a full measuresubset ofΩ. Proof.Fix 1≤i≤p. Consider aP-continuous mapE ′ i : Ω→ G d i (X) satisfying L ω E ′ i (ω) =E ′ i (σω) andE ′ i (ω)⊕V i+1 (ω) =V i (ω) for almost everyω∈Ω. Assume for a contradiction that there is a measurable subsetJ⊂Ω,P(J)>0, such that E i (ω)6=E ′ i (ω) for allω∈J. LetF i (ω) = ⊕ j<i E j (ω). We haveV i+1 (ω)⊕E i (ω)⊕F i (ω) =Xfor allω∈Ω ′ . Let (U n ) n≥0 be a sequence of measurable subsets of Ω,P( ⋃ n≥0 U n ) = 1, such that the mapsV i+1 | U n ,E i | U n andF i | U n are continuous. By Lemma 9, the map E i ⊕F i is continuous onU n for eachn≥0. By Lemma 6, the mapR(ω) := Pr V i+1 (ω)E i (ω)⊕F i (ω) is continuous onU n for eachn≥0. Thus, by Lemma 7, the mappingg(ω) =kR(ω)| E ′ i (ω) kisP-continuous, and in particular, isF-measurable. We first prove that lim n→∞ g(σ n ω) = 0 for almost allω. Letω∈Ω ′ be given. For any fixedu∈E ′ i (ω)\\{0}, we haveR(ω)u∈V i+1 (ω) so that for anyǫ >0 there exists aC <∞withkL (n) ω R(ω)uk≤Ce n(λ i+1 +ǫ) for alln >0. On the other hand sinceu∈V i (ω)\\V i+1 (ω), there is aC ′ >0 such that kL (n) ω uk ≥C ′ e n(λ i −ǫ) for alln. Fixǫ < 1 4 (λ i −λ i−1 ). We have for each fixedu 14GARY FROYLAND, SIMON LLOYD, AND ANTHONY QUAS there is a constantC u such that kL (n) ω R(ω)uk kL (n) ω uk ≤C u e −n(λ i −λ i+1 −2ǫ) for alln >0. We now use a Baire category argument. DefineD N by D N ={u∈E ′ i (ω):kL (n) ω R(ω)uk≤N e −n(λ i −λ i+1 −2ǫ) kL (n) ω uk∀n >0}. Since these sets are closed and their union is all ofE ′ i (ω), one of them must contain a ball B δ (u)∩E ′ i (ω). By scale-invariance it contains a ballB 1 (u/δ)∩E ′ i (ω). Set u 0 =u/δand letx∈E ′ i (ω) satisfykxk= 1. Then we have for eachn kL (n) ω R(ω)(u 0 +x)k≤N e −n(λ i −λ i+1 −2ǫ) kL (n) ω (u 0 +x)k kL (n) ω R(ω)u 0 k≤N e −n(λ i −λ i+1 −2ǫ) kL (n) ω u 0 k. UsingL (n) ω R(ω) =R(σ n ω)L (n) ω , subtracting the above two inequalities and using the triangle inequality we obtain kR(σ n ω)L (n) ω xk≤N e −n(λ i −λ i+1 −2ǫ) (kL (n) ω (u 0 +x)k+kL (n) ω u 0 k). SinceL (n) ω x/kL (n) ω xkis a general point of the intersection of the unit sphere with E ′ i (σ n ω) we obtain g(σ n ω)≤N e −n(λ i −λ i+1 −2ǫ) sup x∈S E ′ i (ω) kL (n) ω (u 0 +x)k+kL (n) ω u 0 k inf x∈S E ′ i (ω) kL (n) ω xk , The numerator is bounded above by an expression of the formCe n(λ i +ǫ) . Similarly, by Lemma 19 the denominator is bounded below by an expression of the form C ′ e n(λ i −ǫ) . It follows thatg(σ n ω)≤(N C/C ′ )e −n(λ i −λ i+1 −4ǫ) . By our choice ofǫ we see thatg(σ n ω)→0 as claimed. Now letω∈Jand let (v n ) be a full orbit overωwithv 0 ∈E ′ i (ω)\\E i (ω). Such an orbit exists sinceL ω mapsE ′ i (ω) bijectively toE ′ i (σ(ω)). Letu n =v n −R(σ n ω)v n andw n =R(σ n ω)v n . SinceE ′ i (ω)⊂E i (ω)⊕V i+1 (ω) we see thatu n ∈E i (σ n ω) (i.e. u n has no component inF i (σ n ω)). We also havew n ∈V i+1 (σ n ω). Sincew 0 6= 0 we havew n 6= 0 for alln <0. We now haveR(σ −n ω)(w −n +u −n ) =w −n . Lemma 20 tells us thatku −n k ≤ Ce −n(λ i −ǫ) and thatkw −n k≥C ′ e −n(λ i+1 +ǫ) . We deduce that lim inf n→∞ g(σ −n ω) = lim inf n→∞ kR(σ −n ω)| E ′ i (σ −n ω) k ≥lim inf n→∞ kw −n k/(kw −n k+ku −n k) = 1. If we consider the setA={ω∈Ω :g(ω)<1/2}we have for almost everyω, σ n ω∈Afor all large positivenwhereasσ n ω6∈Afor all large negativen. This contradicts the Poincar ́e recurrence theorem, and hence the promised uniqueness is established. 3.3.Necessity of invertibility of the base.The Main Theorem provides an invariant splitting in the absence of invertibility of the operators as long as the base is invertible. It is natural to ask whether one can obtain an invariant splitting in the absence of invertibility of the base. The following example establishes that in general this is not possible. A SEMI-INVERTIBLE OSELEDETS THEOREM15 Example 22.Let Σ ={0,1} Z be equipped with the shift-transformationσand the ( 1 2 , 1 2 )-Bernoulli measure and letA 0 andA 1 be two non-commuting invertible 2×2 matrices which we consider as operators onR 2 . LetL ω :R 2 →R 2 be given byL ω = A ω 0 . We assume further that the two Lyapunov exponents of the random dynamical system differ. As is standard we define forn >0,L (−n) ω =A −1 ω −n ◦···◦A −1 ω −1 . We call this random dynamical systemR. Oseledets’ theorem then guarantees that there is a decompositionR 2 =E 1 (ω)⊕ E 2 (ω) such that forv∈E i (ω)\\{0}, (1/n) logkL (n) ω vk →λ i both asn→ ∞and asn→−∞; andL ω (E i (ω)) =E i (σ(ω)) andL −1 σ −1 ω (E i (ω)) =E i (σ −1 ω) for almost everyω. By uniqueness (Theorem 17), this splitting is unique. We define an inverse system Ras follows:Σ = Σ where the base map isσ=σ −1 . We define the operators on this inverse system by L ω =A −1 ω −1 . Oseledets’ theorem guarantees that the splittingE 1 (ω)⊕E 2 (ω) also works forR. We now define non-invertible systemsR + andR − obtained by truncating the shifts inRand Rto one-sided shifts. Σ + is defined to be{0,1} Z + (whereZ + = {0,1,2, . . .}) and Σ − is defined to be{0,1} Z − (whereZ − ={−1,−2, . . .}). Let Σ + and Σ − be equipped with their Borelσ-algebrasB + andB − . The mapsσand σ factor naturally onto mapsσ + on Σ + andσ − on Σ − throughπ + (ω) = (ω n ) n∈Z + andπ − (ω) = (ω n ) n∈Z −. DefineL + η forη∈Σ + =A η 0 as before and similarly L − ξ =A −1 ξ −1 forξ∈Σ − as before. LetR + andR − be the two one-sided dynamical systems. Suppose now for a contradiction that there are Oseledets splittings forR + and R − :E + 1 (η)⊕E + 2 (η) forη∈Σ + andE − 1 (ξ)⊕E − 2 (ξ) forξ∈Σ − respectively. Then one can check thatE + 1 (π + (ω))⊕E + 2 (π + (ω)) is an invariant splitting for Rwhich gives the correct rates of expansion asn→ ∞. Theorem 17 guarantees that there is only one such splitting and hence we see that (8)E i (ω) =E + i (π + (ω)) for almost everyω. SimilarlyE − 1 (π − (ω))⊕E − 2 (π − (ω)) is an invariant splitting for Rwhich gives the correct rates of expansion as the powernof the inverse random dynamical system approaches∞. Since the splitting for Rwas the same as that forRwe deduce that (9)E i (ω) =E − i (π − (ω)) for almost everyω. From (8) we deduce thatE i isF + -measurable whereF + =π + −1 B + whereas from (9) we deduce thatE i isF − -measurable whereF − =π − −1 B − . It follows that theE i areF − ∩F + -measurable. Since the intersectionF − ∩F + is the trivial sigma-algebra it follows thatE i is constant almost everywhere, equal toE ∗ i say. From this it follows thatA 0 (E ∗ i ) =A 1 (E ∗ i ) =E ∗ i so thatA 0 andA 1 have com- mon eigenspaces and hence are simultaneously diagonalizable. Since they do not commute by assumption this is a contradiction. 3.4.Reduction to the invertible case in Thieullen’s Theorem.As men- tioned above Thieullen deduces the non-invertible version of his theorem from the invertible case by constructing an invertible extension of the given system. More specifically if the original system has mapsL ω acting on a Banach spaceXthe new 16GARY FROYLAND, SIMON LLOYD, AND ANTHONY QUAS system has maps ̃ L ω acting on a Banach space ̃ Xwhere ̃ X={(x 0 , x 1 , . . .):x i ∈X,supkx i k<∞}; and ̃ L ω (x 0 , x 1 , . . .) = (L ω (x 0 ), α 0 x 0 , α 1 x 1 , . . .). Thieullen then definesγ n = ∑ k≤n logα k and states conditions on the (α n ) and (γ n ) which suffice to ensure that the exceptional spectrum of the extension agrees with the exceptional spectrum of the original system. His conditions are as follows: (1) (α n ) is a strictly decreasing sequence converging to 0; (2) lim n→∞ γ n /n=−∞; (3)∀μ <0,sup{p≥0:γ p ≥(n+p)μ}=o(n). We claim that Condition (1) implies the other two conditions. That (1) implies (2) is immediate. We now indicate a brief proof that (2) implies (3). Letμ <0 andǫ >0 be given. SetM=−μ/ǫ−μ. By (2) there is ap 0 such that forp≥p 0 we haveγ p /p <−M. At this point, choose ann. Ifγ p ≥(n+p)μ then either (i)p < p 0 or (ii)p≥p 0 and therefore (n+p)μ≤γ p <−pM. In the latter case−pμ/ǫ=p(M+μ)≤−nμ. We then see thatp≤min(p 0 , ǫn). Sinceǫis arbitrary we see that sup{p≥0:γ p ≥(n+p)μ}=o(n) as required and Condition (3) is established. We remark that in Thieullen’s proofs it is sufficient to take a sequence (α k ) for which (2) is satisfied. Clearly the most natural way to do this is totake any sequence satisfying (1). 4.Applications The motivation for the development of Theorem 4 is the desire to extend transfer operator approaches for the global analysis of dynamical systems from deterministic autonomous dynamical systems to random or non-autonomous dynamical systems. A common setting for deterministic systems is:M⊂R m is a smooth manifold andT:M→MaC 1 map with some additional regularity properties. The (deterministic) dynamical systemT:M→Mhas an associatedPerron–Frobenius operatorL T :X→Xdefined byL T f(x) = ∑ y∈T −1 x f(y)/|detDT(y)|, whereXis a Banach space of complex-valued functions onM. The Perron–Frobenius operator evolves density functions onMforward in time, just as the mapTevolves single pointsx∈Mforward in time. More generally, the “weight” 1/|detDT(y)|may be replaced with a sufficiently regular generalised weightg(y) to form atransfer operator. Perron–Frobenius op- erators and transfer operators have proven to be indispensabletools for studying the long term behaviour of dynamical systems. An ergodic absolutely continuous invariant probability measure (ACIP) describes the long term distribution of for- ward trajectories{T k x} ∞ k=0 inMfor Lebesgue almost-all initial points inx∈M. An early use of Perron–Frobenius operators was to prove the existence of ACIMs for piecewiseC 2 expanding maps \[16\]. A study of the peripheral spectrum of L T yielded information on the number of ergodic ACIPs \[13, 25\]. The particular weight function 1/|detDT(y)|is attuned to ACIPs. Other “equilibrium states” can be read off from the leading eigenfunction of the transfer operator by varying the weight functiong(in statistical mechanics terms,gdescribes the local energy of states inM). A SEMI-INVERTIBLE OSELEDETS THEOREM17 The spectrum of the Perron–Frobenius operator provides information on the ex- ponential rate at which observables become temporally decorrelated. The essential spectral radius of Perron–Frobenius operators \[14\] establishesa threshold beyond which spectral values are necessarily isolated. Furthermore, thisradius is typically connected with the average rate at which nearby trajectories separate. Thus, these isolated spectral values are of particular interest in applications because they pre- dict decorrelation rates slower than one expects to be produced by local separation of trajectories. The eigenfunctions associated with these isolated eigenvalues have been used to detect slowly mixing structures in a variety of physicalsystems, see, for example, \[26, 8, 12, 7\]. From a physical applications point of view, it is natural to study random or time-dependent (non-autonomous) dynamical systems using a transfer operator methodology. Theorem 4 considered this question in the setting of afinite num- ber of piecewise linear, expanding interval maps, sharing a joint Markov partition, where the Perron–Frobenius operators acted on the space of functions of bounded variation. In the present work, in our first application, we remove the assumptions of finiteness, piecewise linearity and Markovness, and allow random compositions that are expanding-on-average. Our second application is to subshifts of finite type with random continuously-parametrized weight functions. 4.1.Application I: Interval maps.We now show that Theorem 17 can be ap- plied in the context of random compositions of expanding-on-average mappings acting through their Perron–Frobenius operators on the space BV of functions of bounded variation. In this context a major drawback of the Thieullen approach becomes clear: ifT 1 andT 2 areanytwo distinct expanding mappings then their Perron–Frobenius operatorsL T 1 andL T 2 are far apart in the operator norm on BV. In fact the set of Perron–Frobenius operators acting on BV isdiscrete. As a consequence, in order forω7→L T ω to be a continuous map on a compact space, the maps range ofω7→T ω is forced to be finite. If we wantω7→L T ω to beP-continuous then it can have at most countable range. LetI= \[0,1\]⊂Rdenote the closed unit interval,Bdenote the Borelσ-algebra andmdenote Lebesgue measure. Definition 23.We say a mapT:I→IisRychlikif (1)Tis differentiable on a dense open subsetU T ⊂Iof full measure; (2) for each connected componentBofU T ,T| B extends to a homeomorphism from Bto a subinterval ofI; (3) the functiong T :I→Rhas bounded variation, where g T (x) = { 1 |DT(x)| x∈U T 0otherwise. The class of Rychlik maps is closed under composition. Recall that thevariation of a functionf:I→Ris the quantity (10)var(f) :=sup 0=p 1 <p 2 <...<p k =1 k ∑ i=1 |f(p i )−f(p i−1 )|. A function on the interval is said to be of bounded variation if var(f)<∞. 18GARY FROYLAND, SIMON LLOYD, AND ANTHONY QUAS ThePerron–Frobenius operatorfor a Rychlik mapTis defined, for a function f∈L 1 (I) by (11)L T f(x) = ∑ y∈T −1 (x) g T (y)f(y). The Perron–Frobenius operator is aMarkov operator: that is, iff∈L 1 (I), then ∫ L T fdm= ∫ fdm, and iff≥0, thenL T f≥0. We consider the action ofL T on the Banach space BV := { f∈L ∞ (I) :fhas a version ̃ fwith var ̃ f <∞ } with normkfk:= max(kfk 1 ,inf{var( ̃ f) : ̃ fis a version off}). A version ̃ fof f∈BV has minimal variation if and only if ̃ f(x)∈\[lim y→x − f(y),lim y→x + f(y)\] for allx. We shall assume versions are chosen so as to satisfy this condition, unless stated otherwise. We shall need a lemma that is a combination of Lemmas 4, 5 and 6 from Rychlik \[25\]. Lemma 24(Rychlik \[25\]).LetTbe a Rychlik map of the unit interval and letL T be its Perron-Frobenius operator. Supposeess inf x |T ′ (x)|>1. Leta= 3/ess inf|T ′ |. Then there is a partitionPof the unit interval into finitely many subintervals and a constantDsuch that for allf∈BV varL T f≤avarf+D ∑ J∈P ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ∫ J f ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ . We define a random composition of Rychlik maps as follows. Let{T i } i∈I , be a finite or countably infinite set of Rychlik maps. Let Idenote the one-point compactification ofI(with the discrete topology) and letS= I Z . Letσ:S→ Sbe the shift map and letPbe an ergodic shift-invariant probability measure supported on Ω =I Z . Forω∈Ω letL ω =L T ω 0 be the Perron–Frobenius operator of the mapT ω 0 acting on the space BV. We make the further assumption that ∫ log + kL ω kdP(ω)<∞(or equivalently ∑ i∈I P({i}) logkL T i k<∞). If these conditions are satisfied we refer to the 6-tupleR= (Ω,F,P, σ,BV,L) as aRychlik random dynamical system. One can then verify that the systemRsatisfies the assumptions of Theorem 17. We denote then-fold compositionT σ n−1 ω ◦···T σω ◦T ω byT (n) ω . It is well known that the composition,L (n) ω , of the Perron–Frobenius operators ofT ω , T σω , . . . , T σ n−1 ω is equal to the Perron–Frobenius operator ofT (n) ω . A random composition may also be considered as a single transformation on the space Ω×Iwhich we endow with the sigma-algebraF ⊗B: theskew productΘ : Ω×I→Ω×Iis given by Θ(ω, x) = (σω, T ω x). We shall need a well-known inequality relating the index of compactness to the essential spectral radius. For a version of the converse inequality the reader is referred to work of Morris \[21\]. LetA:X→Xbe a linear operator on a Banach space. We writekAk fr for inf{kA−Fk:Fhas finite rank}. Recall from earlier kAk ic is defined to be inf{r:A(B X ) may be covered by a finite number ofr-balls}. Lemma 25.For a linear operatorAbetween Banach spaceskAk ic ≤kAk fr . A SEMI-INVERTIBLE OSELEDETS THEOREM19 Proof.LetA=F+RwhereFhas finite rank andkRk=r. Letǫ >0. Since F(B X ) is compact it may be covered by a finite number ofǫ-balls for anyǫ > 0, ⋃ N n=1 B ǫ (x n ). HenceA(B X )⊂F(B X ) +R(B X )⊂ ⋃ N n=1 B ǫ (x n ) +B r (0) = ⋃ N n=1 B r+ǫ (x n ) so that for eachǫ >0,kAk ic ≤r+ǫ. Since it is possible to find decompositions withrarbitrarily close tokAk fr the lemma follows. Keller \[14\] used Lemma 24 together with a supplementary argument to identify the essential spectral radius of the Perron–Frobenius operator of an expanding Rychlik map acting on the space of functions of bounded variation. We show that Keller’s argument applies equally in our context of random dynamical systems. Theorem 26.LetR= (Ω,F,P, σ,BV,L)be a Rychlik random dynamical system. Then there exists aχsuch that forP-almost everyω, ( 1/ess inf ∣ ∣ ∣ T (n) ω ′ (x) ∣ ∣ ∣ ) 1/n →χ.(12) Further ifχ <1thenkL (n) ω k 1/n ic →χ. Definition 27.We say that the Rychlik random dynamical system appearing in the theorem isexpanding-on-averageifχ <1. Proof.We note that bothkL (n) ω k ic anda n (ω) = 1/ess inf x ∣ ∣ ∣ T (n) ω ′ (x) ∣ ∣ ∣ are submulti- plicative. It follows from the subadditive ergodic theorem that bothof the limits appearing in the statement of the theorem exist forP-almost everyω. In the case whereχ <1 we claim the following inequalities: (13)a n (ω)≤ ∥ ∥ ∥ L (n) ω ∥ ∥ ∥ ic ≤ ∥ ∥ ∥ L (n) ω ∥ ∥ ∥ fr ≤3a n (ω) provideda n (ω)<1. The middle inequality is Lemma 25. To see the upper bound, letPbe the partition of the interval into subintervals guaranteed by Lemma 24. LetE P be the conditional expectation operator defined by E P f(t) = 1 |J| ∫ J ffort∈J. We then haveL (n) ω =L (n) ω ◦(1−E P ) +L (n) ω ◦E P . The second term has finite rank and Lemma 24 guarantees that var(L (n) ω ◦(1−E P )f)≤3a n (ω) varf. SinceL (n) ω preserves integrals and (1−E P )fhas integral 0, it follows thatL (n) ω ◦(1−E P )f has integral 0 and therefore that theL 1 norm is bounded above by the variation. This yieldskL (n) ω ◦(1−E P )k≤3a n (ω) so thatkL (n) ω k fr ≤3a n (ω). For the lower bound fix anǫ >0 and suppose that 1/|T (n) ω ′ (x)|>(1−ǫ)a n (ω) forxin an intervalJ. Suppose further thatJlies in a single branch ofT (n) ω . Let IandI ′ be two subintervals ofJ, with no endpoints in common and letf I = 1 2 1 I andf I ′ = 1 2 1 I ′ . Then we havekL (n) ω f I −L (n) ω f I ′ k>2(1−ǫ)a n (ω). It follows that no (1−ǫ)a n (ω) ball contains more than twoL (n) ω f I ’s with distinct endpoints and so in particularL (n) ω B BV does not have a finite cover by (1−ǫ)a n (ω) balls. We see that ∥ ∥ ∥ L (n) ω ∥ ∥ ∥ ic ≥(1−ǫ)a n (ω). Sinceǫis arbitrary, we see that (13) follows. Takingnth roots and taking the limit, the theorem follows. 20GARY FROYLAND, SIMON LLOYD, AND ANTHONY QUAS We now demonstrate thatλ ∗ = 0. As a Perron–Frobenius operatorL (n) ω is a stochastic operator for eachω∈Ω, for any density 06≡f∈BV we have kL (n) ω fk ≥ kL (n) ω fk 1 =kfk 1 , which shows thatλ(ω)≥0. To showλ ∗ ≤0, sincekL ω k 1 ≤1, it suffices to consider the growth of the variation ofL (n) ω f. As χ <1, for almost everyω∈Ω there existsn∈N, 0< α <1 andβ≥0 such that varL (n) ω f≤αvarf+βkfk 1 by Lemma 24. Iterating this inequality gives a bound for the sequence (varL (kn) ω ) k∈N , and so lim inf k→∞ (1/(nk)) logkL (nk) ω k≤0. As lim n→∞ (1/n) logkL (n) ω kexists forP-almost everyω, we haveλ ∗ ≤0. Corollary 28.LetR= (Ω,F,P, σ,BV,L)be a Rychlik random dynamical system. Assume thatRis expanding-on-average. ThenRis quasi-compact, with κ ∗ = lim n→∞ 1 n log ( 1/ess inf x ∣ ∣ ∣ T (n) ω ′ (x) ∣ ∣ ∣ ) <0 =λ ∗ forP-almost everyω. The random dynamical system therefore admits aP-continuous Oseledets splitting. The Oseledets splitting provides information on the invariant measures and rates of mixing of the random system. A natural generalisation of the notion of ‘invari- ant measure’ to the random setting is the concept of ‘sample measure’. A family {μ ω } ω∈Ω ofsample measures(see \[2\]), is a family of probability measuresμ ω onI satisfying (1) for allU∈F, the mapω7→μ ω (U) isF-measurable. (2)T ω μ ω =μ σω for a. e.ω∈Ω. Given a family{μ ω } ω∈Ω of sample measures, the measureμon Ω×Igiven by dμ(ω, x) := dμ ω (x)dP(ω) is an invariant probability for the associated skew prod- uct Θ(ω, x) = (σω, T ω x). Conversely, any Θ-invariant probability measureμwith marginalPon Ω may be disintegrated to give a family of sample measures for the original system. Sample measures for random compositions of expanding interval maps have pre- viously been studied by Pelikan \[23\], Morita \[20\], and in a more general setting by Buzzi \[6\]. He considers random compositions of Lasota–Yorke maps that have neither too many branches nor too large distortion, and proves that the associ- ated skew product transformation possesses a finite number of mutually singular ergodic ACIPsμ, each giving a family{μ ω } ω∈Ω of sample measures with densities of bounded variation. Returning to the present setting of a random composition of Rychlik maps, any such family{f ω } ω∈Ω of sample measures with densities of bounded variation satisfies dμ ω /dm∈E 1 (ω) forP-almost everyω. It follows that the number of such mutually singular ergodic ACIPs (whose sample measure den- sities are necessarily linearly independent forP-a.e.ω) is bounded byd 1 , the dimension of the Oseledets subspaceE 1 (ω). Furthermore, the exceptional Lyapunov spectral values strictly less than 0, and their corresponding Oseledets subspaces, provide information onexponential decay rates that are slower than the decay produced by local separation of trajectories. The authors discuss and provide examples of such spectral valuesand Oseledets subspaces in \[10\]. Corollary 28 provides conditions under which Oseledets subspaces exist in much greater generality than in \[10\], removing the assumptions of piecewise linearity and Markovness, and allowing the system to be expanding onaverage. In non-rigorous numerical experiments, Oseledets subspaces have been shown to effectively capture so-called “coherent sets” in aperiodic fluid flow \[11\]. The present A SEMI-INVERTIBLE OSELEDETS THEOREM21 work represents a first step toward making such calculations rigorous by extending the study of Perron–Frobenius operator cocycles to Banach spaces that are more representative of fluid flow. 4.2.Application II: Transfer Operators with Random Weights.Let Σ be a one-sided 1-step shift of finite type onNsymbols. We assume that for each symbol jin the alphabet there is at least oneifor whichijis a legal transition (if not we restrict our attention to the subset of Σ obtained by deleting all symbols that have no preimage). Forx, y∈Σ we let ∆(x, y) be min{n:x n 6=y n }(or∞ifx=y). Theθ-metric on Σ isd θ (x, y) =θ ∆(x,y) (so that the standard metric isd 1/2 ). We will writeSfor the usual left shift map on Σ. Ifx∈Σ andvis a word of some lengthk≥1 in the alphabet such thatv k−1 x 0 is a legal transition then we will writevxfor the point inS −k xobtained by concatenatingvandx. LetC θ denote the set ofθ-Lipschitz functions: those functionsffor which there is aCsuch that|f(x)−f(y)| ≤Cd θ (x, y) for allxandy. We define|f| θ to be the smallestCfor which such an inequality holds. As usual we endowC θ with the topology generated by the normkfk θ = max(|f| θ ,kfk ∞ ). LetW θ be the collection of those functionsginC θ such that min x g(x)>0. DenoteP g f(x) = ∑ y∈S −1 x f(y)g(y) and considerP g as an operator on (C θ ,k·k θ ). For the purposes of the following lemma we consider arbitraryg∈C θ but we shall later restrict tog∈W θ . Lemma 29.The mapP:C θ →L(C θ ,C θ )is continuous with respect to the operator norm onL(C θ ,C θ ). Proof.Pis clearly linear. Letg∈C. We want to boundkP g fk θ . We first estimate kP g fk ∞ . Letx∈Σ. Then|P g f(x)| ≤ ∑ y∈σ −1 x |f(y)|·|g(y)| ≤Nkfk ∞ kgk ∞ ≤ Nkfk θ kgk θ . This yields (14)kP g fk ∞ ≤Nkfk θ kgk θ . We now bound|P g f| θ . Letx6=y∈Σ. We need to estimate|P g f(x)− P g f(y)|/d θ (x, y). Ifx 0 6=y 0 then the denominator is 1 and the numerator is at most 2Nkgk ∞ kfk ∞ ≤2Nkgk θ kfk θ . Ifx 0 =y 0 then |P g f(x)−P g f(y)|= ∑ {i:ix 0 legal} ( g(ix)f(ix)−g(iy)f(iy) ) ≤N(kgk ∞ |f| θ +kfk ∞ |g| θ )d θ (ix, iy) ≤2Nkgk θ kfk θ θd θ (x, y). Combined with the estimate in the casex 0 6=y 0 , this shows|P g f| θ ≤2Nkgk θ ·kfk θ and sokP g k≤2Nkgk θ . Baladi’s book \[3\] contains a number of detailed calculations of the spectral radii and essential spectral radii of Perron–Frobenius operators acting on the Lipschitz spaces. We now develop some of these arguments in the case of random composi- tions. Suppose thatG: Ω7→ W θ ;ω7→g ω is a continuous mapping. Since Ω will be assumed to be compact there will be a constantγsuch thatg ω (x)≥γfor allx∈Σ andω∈Ω. Similarly there will be a constant such thatkg ω k θ ≤Cfor allω∈Ω. We assume as usual thatσ: Ω→Ω is ergodic. We writeP (n) ω for the composition of Perron-Frobenius operatorsP g σ n−1 ω ◦···◦P g ω . 22GARY FROYLAND, SIMON LLOYD, AND ANTHONY QUAS A linear map onC θ is said to bepositiveif it maps non-negative functions to non-negative functions. In particular ifg∈W θ thenP g is positive. Lemma 30.LetR= (Ω,F,P, σ,C θ , P)be a continuous ergodic random dynamical system of Perron-Frobenius operators with random weights on a shift of finite type Σ. Suppose thatΩis compact andP: Ω→ W θ is continuous. LetR n (ω) = kP (n) ω 1k ∞ . ThenR n (ω) 1/n convergesP-almost everywhere to a constantR ∗ . Proof.Since the operatorsP g are positive (gbeing positive), we haveP (n+m) ω 1= P (n) σ m ω (P (m) ω 1)≤P (n) σ m ω R m (ω)1≤R n (σ m ω)R m (ω)1. It follows that logR n (ω) is a subadditive sequence of functions so that by the subadditive ergodic theorem, forP-almost allω,R n (ω) 1/n converges to a quantityR(ω). Since this quantity isσ-invariant, there is a constantR ∗ such thatR(ω) =R ∗ forP-almost every ω∈Ω. Lemma 31(Bounded Distortion).LetRbe as in the previous lemma. Letg (n) ω (x) denote the productg ω (x)g σ(ω) (Sx). . . g σ n−1 ω (S n−1 x). There exists aD >0such that for allω∈Ω, ifx 0 =y 0 andvis a word of an arbitrary lengthksuch that v k−1 x 0 is a legal transition then ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ 1− g (k) ω (vy) g (k) ω (vx) ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ≤Dd θ (x, y). Proof.As mentioned above there is aγ >0 such thatg ω (x)≥γfor allω∈Ω and allx∈Σ. Similarly there is a Γ such thatg ω (x)≤Γ for allωandxand also a Csuch thatkg ω k θ ≤Cfor allω∈Ω. We make use of the fact that there exists a constantKsuch that ifγ < a, b <Γ then|log(b/a)|≤K|b−a|. We then have ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ log g (k) ω (vy) g (k) ω (vx) ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ≤ k−1 ∑ j=0 ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ log g σ j ω (S j (vy)) g σ j ω (S j (vx)) ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ≤K k−1 ∑ j=0 Cd θ (S j (vx), S j (vy)) =CK k−1 ∑ j=0 θ k−j d θ (x, y) ≤(CK/(1−θ))d θ (x, y), Exponentiating we seeg (k) ω (vy)/g (k) ω (vx) lies between the values exp(−rd θ (x, y)) and exp(rd θ (x, y)) wherer=CK/(1−θ). Since exp is Lipschitz on \[−r, r\] there exists aDsuch that|exp(t)−1|≤(D/r)|t|on \[−r, r\]. It follows that ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ g (k) ω (vy) g (k) ω (vx) −1 ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ≤Dd θ (x, y) as required. The next lemma appears as an exercise in the deterministic case in Baladi’s book \[3\]. A SEMI-INVERTIBLE OSELEDETS THEOREM23 Lemma 32.LetRbe as above. Then there exists a constantKsuch that for f∈C θ |P (n) ω f| θ ≤R n (ω)(θ n |f| θ +Kkfk ∞ ). Proof.We need to estimate sup x6=y |P (n) ω f(x)−P (n) ω f(y)|/d θ (x, y). Ifxandydiffer in the zeroth coordinate, the denominator is 1 and we bound the numerator above byR n (ω)kfk ∞ giving a bound of the given form (withK=1). Ifxandyagree in the zeroth coordinate then we estimate as follows. We let W n be the set of wordsvof lengthnsuch thatv n−1 x 0 is legal. |P (n) ω f(x)−P (n) ω f(y)| = ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ∑ v∈W n ( g (n) ω (vx)f(vx)−g (n) ω (vy)f(vy) ) ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ≤ ∑ v∈W n g (n) ω (vx)·|f(vx)−f(vy)|+ ∑ v∈W n |f(vy)|·|g (n) ω (vx)−g (n) ω (vy)| ≤ ∑ v∈W n g (n) ω (vx) ( |f| θ d θ (vx, vy) +kfk ∞ ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ 1− g (n) ω (vy) g (n) ω (vx) ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ) ≤R n (ω) (|f| θ θ n d θ (x, y) +kfk ∞ Dd θ (x, y)). We therefore see that|P (n) ω f| θ ≤R n (ω) (θ n |f| θ +Dkfk ∞ ) as required. Letn >0 and let \[w 1 \], . . . ,\[w k \] be an enumeration of then-cylinders. For each 1≤j≤k, letx j be a point of \[w j \]. Given these choices, define a finite rank operator Π n :C θ →C θ by (Π n f)(x) =f(x j ) forx∈\[w j \]. Lemma 33.Forf∈C θ andΠ n as above we have k(I−Π n )fk ∞ ≤θ n |f| θ |(I−Π n )f| θ ≤max(2θ,1)|f| θ . Proof.LetQ:C θ →C θ denoteI−Π n . Letx∈\[w j \]. ThenQf(x) =f(x)−f(x j ). Since ∆(x, x j )≥n, we have|Qf(x)|≤|f| θ θ n . Now letx, y∈Σ. If they lie in the samen-cylinder set then|Qf(x)−Qf(y)|= |f(x)−f(y)|≤|f| θ d θ (x, y). On the other hand ifxandylie in distinctn-cylinders, \[w i \] and \[w j \] respectively then we have |Qf(x)−Qf(y)|=|(f(x)−f(x i ))−(f(y)−f(x j ))| ≤|f(x)−f(x i )|+|f(y)−f(x j )|. Since ∆(x, x i ) and ∆(y, x j ) are each at leastnthe right side is bounded above by 2|f| θ θ n ≤(2θ)|f| θ d θ (x, y). Theorem 34.LetRbe as above. Then there areC 1 >0andC 2 >0such that R n (ω)≤kP (n) ω k≤C 1 R n (ω) (1/4)θ n R n (ω)≤kP (n) ω k ic ≤C 2 θ n R n (ω). In particularλ(ω) =R ∗ andκ(ω) =θR ∗ forP-almost everyωso that the random dynamical system is quasi-compact. 24GARY FROYLAND, SIMON LLOYD, AND ANTHONY QUAS Proof.LetKbe as in Lemma 32. Letf∈ C θ . We have|P (n) ω f| θ ≤(K+ 1)R n (ω)kfk θ . AlsoP (n) ω f≤P (n) ω (kfk ∞ 1)≤R n (ω)kfk ∞ . Combining these we see thatkP (n) ω fk θ ≤(K+ 1)R n (ω)kfk θ . On the other hand we havekP (n) ω 1k θ ≥R n (ω) whilek1k θ = 1 so the bounds on kP (n) ω kare established. For the upper bound onkP (n) ω k ic we use Lemma 25 to compare withkP (n) ω k fr and we let Π n be as above and give bounds onkP (n) ω ◦(I−Π n )k. Letf∈C θ . We have kP (n) ω ◦(I−Π n )fk ∞ ≤R n (ω)k(I−Π n )fk ∞ ≤θ n R n (ω)|f| θ where the last inequality made use of Lemma 33. Using Lemmas 32 and 33 we see|P (n) ω ((I−Π n )f)| θ ≤ R n (ω)(θ n max(2θ,1)|f| θ +Kθ n kfk ∞ ). Combining these two inequalities leads to an upper bound of the desired form forkP (n) ω k ic . For the lower bound onkP (n) ω k ic there exists (by continuity) an open setUon whichP (n) ω 1(x)> R n (ω)/2. We show that the index of compactness is large by exhibiting an infinite collection of points in the unit sphere ofC θ whose images underP (n) ω are uniformly separated. Letu∈Uand letC k be thek-cylinder aboutu. SinceUis open there exists ak 0 such thatC k 0 ⊂U. Since Σ is an irreducible shift of finite type there exists an infinite sequencek 0 < k 1 < k 2 < . . .such thatC k i is a proper subset ofC k i −1 for alli≥1. We letf i =θ k i +n−1 1 C k i ◦S n . To check thatkf i k θ = 1 we note that ifxandyagree on at least the firstk i +nsymbols thenf i (x) =f i (y). Since the numerator of|f i (x)−f i (y)|/θ ∆(x,y) takes only the values 0 andθ k i +n−1 the maximum in this expression is obtained by takingxandythat agree for as many symbols as possible, but for whichf i (x)6=f i (y). By the assumption on Σ and choice ofk i there are points agreeing fork i +n−1 symbols but disagreeing on the k i +n−1st symbol for whichf i (x)6=f i (y) so thatkf i k θ = 1 as required. We then calculate P (n) ω f i (x) = ∑ {w n−1 0 :w n−1 x 0 is legal} g (n) ω (wx)θ k i +n−1 1 C k i ◦S n (wx) =θ k i +n−1 1 C k i (x)P (n) ω 1(x). Lettingh=P (n) ω f i −P (n) ω f j , we haveh= (θ k i +n−1 1 C k i −θ k j +n−1 1 C k j )P (n) ω 1. Leti < jand pickx∈C k j −1 \\C k j andy∈C k i −1 \\C k i . Then we have ∆(x, y) = k i −1,h(x) =θ k i +n−1 P (n) ω 1(x)≥(1/2)θ k i +n−1 R n (ω) whereash(y) = 0 giving khk θ ≥(1/2)θ n R n (ω). It follows that no ball of radius less than (1/4)θ n R n (ω) can contain twoP (n) ω f i ’s and sokP (n) ω k ic ≥(1/4)θ n R n (ω).  Example 35.Letσ: Ω→Ω be any homeomorphic dynamical system defined on a compact space Ω preserving an ergodic probability measureP. Let Σ ={0,1} Z + . Fix 0< θ <1 and let{h ω :ω∈Ω}be a continuously-parameterized family of antisymmetric monotonic elements ofC θ (Σ), where a function isantisymmeticif it satisfiesh( ̄x) =−h(x) forx∈Σ, where ̄x i = 1−x i . A function will be called monotonicif it satisfiesh(x)≤h(y) wheneverxy, wherexymeansx i ≤y i for eachi. A SEMI-INVERTIBLE OSELEDETS THEOREM25 We will assume thatkh ω k ∞ < a <1/2 for allω∈Ω. We then define a continu- ously parameterized family of elementsg ω ofW θ by g ω (1x) = 1 2 +h ω (x) g ω (0x) = 1 2 −h ω (x). From the choice ofg ω , we see thatP ω 1=1for allωso thatR ∗ = 1 andλ(ω) = 1 for a.e.ωand henceκ(ω) =θfor a.e.ωby Theorem 34. One can verify that theP ω map antisymmetric functions to antisymmetric func- tions and monotonic functions to monotonic functions. Following Liverani \[18\] we define a coneK a ={f:f(x)>0,∀x;f(x)/f(y)≤e ad θ (x,y) ,∀x, y}. For suitably largea, there isa ′ < asuch thatP ω (K a )⊂K a ′ . Since1is a fixed point the theory of cones guarantees that iffis a positive function inC θ , thenP (n) ω fconverges at an exponential rate to a constant uniformly inω. In particular an antisymmetric functionfcan be written as the difference of two positive functions:f 1 −f 2 . Since P (n) ω f 1 converges exponentially fast to a constantC 1 (ω) andP (n) ω f 2 converges ex- ponentially to a constantC 2 (ω), the fact thatP (n) ω fremains antisymmetric implies thatC 1 (ω) =C 2 (ω). It follows thatP (n) ω fconverges at an exponential rate to 0 uniformly overω∈Ω. Choosingf(x) =1 \[1\] −1 \[0\] ,fis both monotone and antisymmetric. It follows thatP (n) ω fdecays exponentially. We are able to give a lower bound on the decay rate that guarantees the presence of non-trivial exceptional spectrum. Specifically, using the fact thatg ω (0x) +g ω (1x) = 1, we have P ω f(1111. . .) =g ω (1111. . .)f(1111. . .) +g ω (0111. . .)f(0111. . .) =g ω (1111. . .)f(1111. . .) + (1−g ω (1111. . .))f(0000. . .) = (2g ω (1111. . .)−1)f(1111. . .). If theh ω are chosen in such a way thatg ω (1111. . .) is uniformly close to 1 asω varies then we will ensure that there is non-trivial exceptional spectrum. Acknowledgements GF and SL acknowledge support by the Australian Research CouncilDiscovery Project DP0770289. AQ acknowledges partial support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada and support while visiting the Univer- sity of New South Wales from the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Mathematics and Statistics of Complex Systems (MASCOS). References \[1\] Alexander Arbieto, Carlos Matheus, and Krerley Oliveira. Equilibrium states for random non-uniformly expanding maps.Nonlinearity, 17(2):581–593, 2004. \[2\] Ludwig Arnold.Random dynamical systems. Springer Monographs in Mathematics. Springer- Verlag, Berlin, 1998. \[3\] Viviane Baladi.Positive transfer operators and decay of correlations, volume 16 ofAdvanced Series in Nonlinear Dynamics. World Scientific Publishing Co. Inc., River Edge, NJ, 2000. \[4\] Luis Barreira and C ́esar Silva. Lyapunov exponents for continuous transformations and di- mension theory.Discrete Contin. Dyn. Syst., 13(2):469–490, 2005. \[5\] B ́ela Bollob ́as.Linear analysis: an introductory course. Cambridge University Press, Cam- bridge, second edition, 1999. \[6\] J ́erˆome Buzzi. Absolutely continuous S.R.B. measuresfor random Lasota-Yorke maps.Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 352(7):3289–3303, 2000. 26GARY FROYLAND, SIMON LLOYD, AND ANTHONY QUAS \[7\] M. Dellnitz, G. Froyland, C. Horenkamp, K. Padberg-Gehle, and A. Sen Gupta. Seasonal variability of the subpolar gyres in the southern ocean: a numerical investigation based on transfer operators.Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics, 16(6):655–663, 2009. \[8\] Michael Dellnitz, Oliver Junge, Wang Sang Koon, Francois Lekien, Martin W. Lo, Jerrold E. Marsden, Kathrin Padberg, Robert Preis, Shane D. Ross, and Bianca Thiere. Transport in dynamical astronomy and multibody problems.Internat. J. Bifur. Chaos Appl. Sci. Engrg., 15(3):699–727, 2005. \[9\] D. H. Fremlin. Measurable functions and almost continuous functions.Manuscripta Math., 33(3-4):387–405, 1980/81. \[10\] Gary Froyland, Simon Lloyd, and Anthony Quas. Coherentstructures and exceptional spec- trum for Perron–Frobenius cocycles. doi:10.1017/S0143385709000339, Published online by Cambridge University Press 04 Sep 2009. \[11\] Gary Froyland, Simon Lloyd, and Naratip Santitissadeekorn. Coherent sets for nonau- tonomous dynamical systems. http://arxiv.org/abs/0911.0717, Submitted. \[12\] Gary Froyland, Kathrin Padberg, Matthew H. England, and Anne Marie Treguier. Detection of coherent oceanic structures via transfer operators.Phys. Rev. Lett., 98(22), 2007. \[13\] Franz Hofbauer and Gerhard Keller. Ergodic propertiesof invariant measures for piecewise monotonic transformations.Math. Z., 180(1):119–140, 1982. \[14\] Gerhard Keller. On the rate of convergence to equilibrium in one-dimensional systems.Comm. Math. Phys., 96(2):181–193, 1984. \[15\] Yuri Kifer and Pei-Dong Liu. Random dynamics. InHandbook of dynamical systems. Vol. 1B, pages 379–499. Elsevier B. V., Amsterdam, 2006. \[16\] A. Lasota and James A. Yorke. On the existence of invariant measures for piecewise monotonic transformations.Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 186:481–488 (1974), 1973. \[17\] Zeng Lian.Lyapunov exponents and invariant manifolds for random dynamical systems in a Banach space. PhD thesis, Brigham Young University, 2008. \[18\] Carlangelo Liverani. Decay of correlations.Ann. of Math. (2), 142(2):239–301, 1995. \[19\] Ricardo Ma ̃n ́e. Lyapounov exponents and stable manifolds for compact transformations. In Geometric dynamics (Rio de Janeiro, 1981), volume 1007 ofLecture Notes in Math., pages 522–577. Springer, Berlin, 1983. \[20\] Takehiko Morita. Random iteration of one-dimensionaltransformations.Osaka J. Math., 22(3):489–518, 1985. \[21\] Ian Morris. The generalized Berger-Wang formula and the spectral radius of linear cocycles. preprint, 2009. \[22\] V. I. Oseledec. A multiplicative ergodic theorem. Characteristic Ljapunov, exponents of dy- namical systems.Trudy Moskov. Mat. Obˇsˇc., 19:179–210, 1968. \[23\] S. Pelikan. Invariant densities for random maps of the interval.Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 281(2):813–825, 1984. \[24\] David Ruelle. Characteristic exponents and invariantmanifolds in Hilbert space.Ann. of Math. (2), 115(2):243–290, 1982. \[25\] Marek Rychlik. Bounded variation and invariant measures.Studia Math., 76(1):69–80, 1983. \[26\] Ch. Sch ̈utte, W. Huisinga, and P. Deuflhard. Transfer operator approach to conformational dynamics in biomolecular systems. InErgodic theory, analysis, and efficient simulation of dynamical systems, pages 191–223. Springer, Berlin, 2001. \[27\] P. Thieullen. Fibr ́es dynamiques asymptotiquement compacts. Exposants de Lyapounov. En- tropie. Dimension.Ann. Inst. H. Poincar ́e Anal. Non Lin ́eaire, 4(1):49–97, 1987. E-mail address:g.froyland@unsw.edu.au E-mail address:s.lloyd@unsw.edu.au E-mail address:aquas@uvic.ca (Froyland and Lloyd)School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of New South Wales, Sydney NSW 2052, Australia (Quas)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Victoria, Victoria BC, Canada V8W 3R4