A semi-invertible operator Oseledets theorem Cecilia Gonz ́alez-Tokman ∗ Anthony Quas † October 15, 2011 Abstract Semi-invertible multiplicative ergodic theorems establish the existence of an Oseledets splitting for cocycles of non-invertible linear operators (such as transfer operators) over an invertible base. Using a constructive approach, we establish a semi-invertible multiplicative ergodic theorem that for the first time can be applied to the study of transfer operators associated to the composition of piecewise expanding interval maps ran- domly chosen from a set of cardinality of the continuum. We also give an application of the theorem to random compositions of perturbations of an expanding map in higher dimensions. 1 Introduction 1.1 Motivation and History Oseledets’ proof, in 1965, of the multiplicative ergodic theorem is a milestone in the development of modern ergodic theory. It has been applied to differentiable dynamical systems to establish the existence of Lyapunov exponents and plays a crucial role in the construction of stable and unstable manifolds. It also has substantial applications in the theory of random matrices, Markov chains, etc. The proof has been generalized in many directions by a number of authors (including Ruelle \[40\], Ma ̃n ́e \[37\], Ledrappier \[26\], Raghunathan \[39\], Kaima- novich \[25\] and many others). In the original version, one has an ergodic measure-preserving systemσ: Ω→Ω and for eachω∈Ω, a corresponding matrixA(ω)∈M d (R). Under suitable integrability conditions on the norms of the matrices it is shown that over almost every point,ω, of Ω, there is a measurably-varying collection of subspaces (V i (ω)) 1≤i≤k , with a decreasing se- quence of characteristic exponentsλ i such that (i) the subspaces areequivariant - that is,A(ω)(V i (ω))⊂V i (σω); and (ii) that vectors inV i (ω) (typically) expand ∗ Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Victoria, Victoria, B.C., Canada V8W 3R4. Email: ceciliag@uvic.ca. CGT is supported by a PIMS Postdoctoral Fellowship. † Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Victoria, Victoria, B.C., Canada V8W 3R4. Email: aquas@uvic.ca. AQ is supported by NSERC. 1 at rateλ i under sequential applications of the matricesA(σ j ω) along the orbit. That is, lim n→∞ 1 n log‖A(σ n−1 ω)···A(ω)v‖=λ i . More specifically and of crucial significance for this article, Oseledets’ multi- plicative ergodic theorem was proved in two versions: an invertible version and a non-invertible version. In the invertible version the following is assumed:σis an invertible trans- formation of Ω; the matricesA(ω) are each invertible and ∫ log + ‖A(ω)‖dP(ω) and ∫ log + ‖A(ω) −1 ‖dP(ω) are both finite. The conclusion of the theorem is then that there is for almost everyωa measurablesplittingofR d : R d =Y 1 (ω)⊕Y 2 (ω)⊕...⊕Y l (ω)(1) such that for allv∈Y i (ω)\\{0} lim n→∞ log‖A (n) (ω)v‖ n =λ i ;(2) lim n→−∞ log‖A (n) (ω)v‖ n =λ i ,(3) whereA (n) denotes the matrix cocycleA(σ n−1 ω)···A(ω) forn >0 whereas for n <0, it isA(σ −n ω) −1 ···A(σ −1 ω) −1 . In the non-invertible version of the theorem,σis no longer assumed to be invertible and there is no assumption on the invertibility of the matricesA(ω). In this case there is a weaker conclusion: rather than a splitting ofR d one obtains afiltration: A decreasing sequence of subspaces ofR d R d =V 1 (ω)⊃V 2 (ω)⊃...⊃V l (ω)(4) such that for allv∈V i (ω)\\V i+1 (ω) (definingV l+1 (ω) to be{0}), (2) holds. In \[18\], Froyland, Lloyd and Quas refined the dichotomy between invertible and non-invertible versions of the theorem, introducing a third class of versions of the theorem:semi-invertiblemultiplicative ergodic theorems. For semi-in- vertible ergodic theorems the underlying dynamical system is assumed to be invertible, but no assumption is made on the invertibility of the matrices. The conclusion of the theorem in this category is that there is again a splitting of the vector space (instead of a filtration) and that for allv∈Y i (ω)\\{0}, (2) holds (but not (3) which does not make sense in this context). Our motivation for considering semi-invertible multiplicative ergodic theo- rems comes from application-oriented studies of rates of mixing due to Dellnitz, Froyland and collaborators \[12, 11, 17\]. Given a measure-preserving dynamical system it is called (strong-) mixing ifμ(A∩T −n B)→μ(A)μ(B) for all mea- surable setsAandB. This is an asymptotic independence property for any measurable sets under evolution. An equivalent formulation of mixing is that ∫ f·g◦T n dμshould converge to ∫ f dμ ∫ g dμfor allL 2 functionsfandg. Clearly nothing is lost if one demands that the functions should have zero integral. 2 Relaxing the assumption thatμis an invariant measure, one may takeμ to be some ambient measure (e.g. Lebesgue measure in the case thatTis a smooth map of a manifold or subset ofR d ). A key tool in this study is the Perron- Frobenius Operatorortransfer operator,L, acting onL 1 (μ). This is the pre-dual of the operator of composition withTacting onL ∞ , the so-called Koopman operator, so that ∫ f·g◦T dμ= ∫ Lf·g dμfor allf∈L 1 andg∈L ∞ ). In many cases one can give a straightforward expression forLf. It is not hard to check from the definition thatLf=fif and only iffis the density of an absolutely continuous invariant measure forT. One might naively ask for the rate of convergence of ∫ f·g◦T n dμto 0 if indeed the system is mixing, but simple examples show that there is no uniform rate of convergence: one can construct in any non-trivial mixing system, func- tionsfandgsuch that the rate of convergence is arbitrarily slow. One does however obtain rates of mixing if one places suitable restrictions on the class of ‘observables’fandgfor which one computes ∫ f·g◦T n dμ. It turns out that an important reason that the Perron-Frobenius operator is so useful is that if one restricts the functionfto a suitable smaller Banach space of observables B⊂L 1 , then in many casesLmapsBtoB; and better stillLis a quasi- compact operator onB, so that the spectrum ofLconsists of a discrete set of values outside the essential spectral radius each corresponding to eigenvalues ofLwith finite-dimensional eigenspaces. Given this one can relate the rate of mixing of the dynamical system (restricted to a suitable class of observables) to the spectral properties of the operatorLrestricted to the Banach spaceB. It is a key fact for our purposes that the Perron-Frobenius operatorsLthat one works with are almost invariably non-invertible. Ulam’s method takes this one step further, replacing the operatorLby a finite rank approximation. In works of Froyland \[15, 16\] and Baladi, Isola and Schmitt \[3\], the relationship between the finite rank approximations ofL and the original Perron-Frobenius operators is studied. This turns out to be remarkably effective and this is a good technique for computing invariant mea- sures numerically (see for example work of Dellnitz and Junge \[12\], Froyland\[14\], Keane, Murray and Young \[28\]). Keller and Liverani \[29\] showed that excep- tional eigenvalues ofL(those outside the essential spectral radius) persist under approximation ofL. In a development of Ulam’s method, \[12\] and later \[16\] related the large sub- unit eigenvalues and corresponding eigenvectors of the finite rank approximation ofLto properties of the underlying system. In particular they showed that these exceptional eigenvectors give rise to global features inhibiting mixing of the system (whereas the essential spectral radius is related to local features inhibiting mixing of the system). For a cartoon example, one can consider a map of the interval \[−1,1\] in which the left sub-interval \[−1,0\] and right sub- interval \[0,1\] are almost invariant (that is only a small amount of mass leaks from one to the other under application of the map) but within each subinterval there is rapid mixing- see work of Gonz ́alez-Tokman, Hunt and Wright \[23\] and Dellnitz, Froyland and Sertl \[11\]. In this case one observes eigenvalues that are close to 1, where the eigenfunction takes values close to 1 on one sub-interval 3 and close to−1 on the other sub-interval. In applied work Dellnitz, Froyland and collaborators\[21, 10\] make use of these exceptional eigenvectors to analyse the ocean and locate regions with poor mixing, called gyres. The current work (and its predecessors \[18\] and \[19\]) is motivated by ex- tending the program of Dellnitz and Froyland to the case of forced dynamical systems (or equivalently random dynamical systems), that is systems of the formT(ω,x) = (σ(ω),T ω (x)). Again as a cartoon example, one can consider the effect of the moon on the oceans: the moon evolves autonomously (and invertibly), whereas the evolution of the ocean is affected by the position of the moon. Relating this to the context of the multiplicative ergodic theorem, think of the dynamical systemσ: Ω→Ω as being the autonomous dynamics of the moon and theω-dependent matrix to be a map on a Banach space of densities in the ocean. The aim is, once again, to identify and study the second and subsequent exceptional eigenspaces with a view to understanding obstructions to mixing. The importance of the semi-invertible multiplicative ergodic theo- rems here (the underlying base dynamics is invertible but the Perron-Frobenius operators are non-invertible) are that the obstructions to mixing, theV 2 (ω), ap- pear here as finite-dimensional subspaces rather than the finite-codimensional subspaces that one would obtain from the standard multiplicative ergodic the- orems. This program has been demonstrated to work in practice for driven cylinder flows in an article of Froyland, Lloyd and Santitissadeekorn \[20\]. In all three works, this paper and its two predecessors, \[18\] and \[19\], the goal is to prove a semi-invertible multiplicative ergodic theorem and apply it to as general a class of random dynamical systems as possible. In all three papers, the starting point was a pair of multiplicative ergodic theorems: an invertible and a non-invertible; and then to derive, using the pair of ergodic theorems as black boxes, a semi-invertible ergodic theorem. \[18\] dealt with the original Oseledets context ofd×dreal matrices (and used Oseledets’ original theorem \[38\] as the basis). \[19\] dealt with the case of an operator-valued multiplicative ergodic theorem where the mapL:ω7→L(ω) is (almost)-continuous with respect to the operator norm (using a theorem of Thieullen \[43\] as a basis). The current paper deals with the case of an operator- valued multiplicative ergodic theorem where the mapω7→ L(ω) is measurable with respect to aσ-algebra related to the strong operator topology (using a Theorem of Lian and Lu \[35\] as a basis). The applications to random dynamical systems have become progressively more general through the sequence of works: \[18\] applied to finite-dimensional approximations of random dynamical systems (using the Ulam scheme) as well as dealing exactly with some dynamical systems satisfying an extremely strong jointly Markov condition. \[19\] applied to one-dimensional expanding maps. However, since the set of Perron-Frobenius operators ofC 2 expanding maps acting on the space of functions of bounded variation is uniformly discrete, the conditions of the theorem restricted the authors to studying random dynamical systems with at most countably many maps. In the current paper, Lian and Lu’s result allows us to weaken the continuity assumption to strong measurability (defined below). Essentially, this amounts to checking continuity ofω7→ L T ω f 4 for afixedf. The cost, however, is that the Banach space on which the transfer operators act is now required to be separable (which the space of functions of bounded variation, used in \[19\], is not). In order to apply the semi-invertible er- godic theorem to random one-dimensional expanding maps, we make substantial use of recent work of Baladi and Gou ̈ezel \[2\] who used a family of local Sobolev norms to study Perron-Frobenius operators of (higher-dimensional) piecewise hyperbolic maps; see also Thomine \[44\] for a specialization in the context of expanding maps. While Baladi and Gou ̈ezel were working with a single map, we show that the Perron-Frobenius operators on the Banach spaces that they construct depend in a suitable way for families of expanding one-dimensional maps allowing us to apply our semi-invertible multiplicative ergodic theorem (making essential use also of an idea of Buzzi \[7\]). We also point out that, to our knowledge, it was not even known whether an Oseledets filtration existed in this setting. Another feature of the proofs is the way in which the semi-invertible the- orem is proved from the invertible and non-invertible theorems. The essential issue is that the non-invertible theorem provides equivariant families of finite co-dimensional subspacesV i (ω) (being the set of vectors that expand at rate λ i or less). One is then attempting to build an equivariant family of (finite- dimensional) vector spacesY i (ω) so thatV i+1 (ω)⊕Y i (ω) =V i (ω). In \[18\] this was done in a relatively natural way (by pushing forward the orthogonal complement ofV i (σ −n ω) V i+1 (σ −n ω) underA(σ −1 ω)···A(σ −n ω) and taking a limit asntends to infinity). In \[19\], the proof exploited the structure of the proof given by Thieullen. Specifically Thieullen first proved the invertible multiplicative ergodic theorem and then obtained the non-invertible theorem as a corollary by building an inverse limit Banach space (reminiscent of the standard inverse limit construc- tions in ergodic theory). The finite-co-dimensional familyV i (ω) was obtained by projecting the corresponding subspaces from the invertible theorem onto their zeroth coordinate. In \[19\] it was proved that applying the same projection to the finite-dimensional complementary family yielded theY i (ω) spaces. This proof, while relatively simple, is problematic for applications as there appears to be no sensible way to computationally work with these inverse limit spaces. We see this proof technique as non-constructive. This non-constructive proof technique should probably apply with a high degree of generality. In the current paper we come back much closer to the scheme applied in \[18\]. The same non-constructive techniques that were used by Thieullen to obtain the non-invertible theorem from the invertible theorem were used by Son in his thesis \[13\] to obtain a non-invertible version of the result of Lian and Lu \[35\]. Starting from the non-constructive existence proof of the finite co-dimensional subspaces we obtain a constructive proof of the finite-dimensionalY i (ω) spaces. We see this as being likely to lead to computational methods although we have not implemented these at the current time. 5 1.2 Statement of Results and structure of paper The context of Lian and Lu’s multiplicative ergodic theorem is that of strongly measurable families of operators. IfXis a separable Banach space, thenL(X) will denote the set of bounded linear maps fromXtoX. The strong operator topology onL(X) is the topology generated by the sub-base consisting of sets of the form{T:‖T(x)−y‖< }. The strongσ-algebraSis defined to be the Borelσ-algebra onL(X) generated by the strong operator topology. Appendix A develops a number of basic results about strong-measurability, including the following useful characterization: A mapL: Ω→L(X) is strongly measurable if for eachx∈X, the map Ω→X, ω7→ L(ω)(x) is measurable with respect to theσ-algebra on Ω and the Borel σ-algebra onX. Of course the ‘strong operator topology’ is very much coarser than the norm topology onL(X) - checking continuity in the strong operator topology can be done onexat a time. This is the essential difference between the result of Thieullen and that of Lian and Lu: for a given functionf,L(ω)fandL(ω ′ )f are close ifT ω andT ω ′ are close enough, but the operatorsL T ω andL T ω ′ are, in many interesting cases, uniformly far apart. (An exception to this is the setting of smooth expanding analytic maps.) For convenience we state our main results here, even though some of the terms in the statement have yet to be defined. These correspond to Theorems 2.10 and 3.19 in the body of the paper. Our new semi-invertible multiplicative ergodic theorem is the following (for simplicity we state the version in which there are finitely many exceptional exponents; a corresponding version holds if there are countably many exponents which then necessarily converge toκ ∗ ). Theorem A.Letσbe an invertible ergodic measure-preserving transforma- tion of the Lebesgue space(Ω,F,P). LetXbe a separable Banach space with separable dual. LetL: Ω→L(X)be a strongly measurable family of map- pings such thatlog + ‖L(ω)‖∈L 1 (P)and suppose that the random linear system R= (Ω,F,P,σ,X,L)is quasi-compact (i.e. the analogue of the spectral radius, λ ∗ , is larger than the analogue of the essential spectral radius,κ ∗ ). Then there exists1≤l≤ ∞and a sequence of exceptional Lyapunov expo- nentsλ ∗ =λ 1 > λ 2 > ... > λ l > κ ∗ (or in the caseλ=∞,λ ∗ =λ 1 > λ 2 > ...; lim n→∞ λ n =κ ∗ ). ForP-almost everyωthere exists a unique measurable equivariant splitting ofXinto closed subspacesX=V(ω)⊕ ⊕ l j=1 Y j (ω)where theY j (ω)are finite- dimensional. For eachy∈Y j (ω)\\{0},lim n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω y‖=λ j . Fory∈ V(ω),lim n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω y‖≤κ ∗ . The application to random piecewise expanding systems is as follows: Theorem B.Letσbe an invertible ergodic measure-preserving transformation of the Lebesgue space(Ω,F,P). For eachω∈Ω, letT ω be a random expanding 6 dynamical system acting onX 0 ⊂R d . Assume further thatω7→T ω is Borel- measurable, theC 1+α norm ofT ω is uniformly bounded above, the mapsT ω have a derivative that is uniformly bounded away from 1, and that some integrability conditions are satisfied. Suppose that eitherd= 1(Lasota-Yorke case); ord >1and the maps T ω areC 2 , have a common branch partition and belong to a sufficiently small neighbourhood of a Cowieson map. Then there exist a separable, reflexive Banach spaceXcontaining theC ∞ functions supported onX 0 for which the mapω7→ L ω given by the transfer operator associated toT ω is strongly measurable, a quantity1≤l≤ ∞, a sequence of exceptional exponents0 =λ 1 > ... > λ l > κ ∗ , (or ifl=∞, then 0 =λ 1 > λ 2 > ... > κ ∗ ;lim n→∞ λ n =κ ∗ ), and a family of finite-dimensional equivariant subspaces(Y i (x)) 1≤i≤l satisfying the conclusions of Theorem A. The main motivation behind our search for semi-invertible Oseledets theo- rems has been to provide a general framework in which it is possible to identify low-dimensional spaces that are responsible for impeding mixing in infinite- dimensional dynamical systems. Following Dellnitz, Froyland and collaborators we want to extract information not simply from the exceptional Lyapunov ex- ponents, but rather from the corresponding Lyapunov subspaces. It is important to note that exponential decay of correlations is not assumed. Our work applies, for instance, to an example of Buzzi in \[6\] (Example 3). Buzzi’s example (which works by essentially having two copies of the interval and a pair of maps each of which acts as doubling on each interval and then simply permutes the intervals) fails to have exponential decay of correlations, but it is still quasi-compact. In our context this will be reflected in the fact that the top exceptional Lyapunov subspace has multiplicity 2 rather than 1. In fact, the structure of this top subspace exactly illustrates the goal of our work because the Oseledets space will consist of a constant function and a function which is 1 on one of the intervals and−1 on the other, thereby indicating the source of non-mixing. In addition, there are examples in the existing literature showing the possi- bilities of having more than one Oseledets space; that is,l≥2. In the random setting, there is an example by Froyland, Lloyd and Quas, \[18, Theorem 5.1\]; in the deterministic case, there is one by Keller and Rugh \[30, Theorem 1\]. In fact, it isa prioripossible to have all sorts of combinations for number of exceptional Lyapunov exponents (1≤l≤ ∞) and multiplicities (1≤m 1 ,...,m l <∞), in a similar way that square matrices may have different Jordan normal forms. In section 2 we give the proof of the semi-invertible multiplicative theorem. In section 3 we introduce the fractional Sobolev spaces (as used in Baladi and Gou ̈ezel) and study the continuity properties of the map sending a Lasota-Yorke map to its Perron-Frobenius operator. We then adapt the proof given by Baladi and Gou ̈ezel of quasi-compactness for a single map to the situation of a random composition of one-dimensional expanding maps (using results of Hennion and Buzzi) to show that the theorem of section 2 applies in this context. We also present an application of Theorem A to piecewise expanding maps in higher 7 dimensions, building on work of Cowieson \[9\]. Section 4 summarizes possible directions for future work. The paper has three appendices: Appendix A contains results about strong measurability. Appendix B contains results about the Grassmannian of a sep- arable Banach space. Appendix C collects some results from ergodic theory: a useful characterization of tempered maps and a Hennion type theorem for random linear systems. 1.3 Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank Viviane Baladi, Chris Bose, J ́erˆome Buzzi, Jim Campbell, and Karl Petersen for useful discussions, as well as Gary Froyland and an anonymous referee for providing a wide range of helpful suggestions and bibliographical references. 2 Oseledets splittings for random linear systems. 2.1 Preliminaries Throughout this section, letXbe a separable Banach space with separable dual X ∗ . We start by introducing some notation about random dynamical systems. Definition 2.1.Astrongly measurable random linear systemis a tuple R= (Ω,F,P,σ,X,L)such that(Ω,F,P)is a Lebesgue space,σis a probability preserving transformation of(Ω,F,P), and the generatorL: Ω→L(X)is a strongly measurable map (see Definition A.3). We use the notationL (n) ω = L(σ n−1 ω)◦···◦L(ω). Definition 2.2.Theindex of compactness(or Kuratowski measure of non- compactness) of a bounded linear mapA:X→Xis ‖A‖ ic(X) = inf{r >0 :A(B X )can be covered by finitely many balls of radiusr}, whereBdenotes the unit ball inX. Definition 2.3.LetR= (Ω,F,P,σ,X,L)be a strongly measurable random linear system. Assume that ∫ log + ‖L ω ‖dP(ω)<∞. For eachω∈Ω, the maximal Lyapunov exponentforωis defined as λ(ω) := lim n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω ‖, whenever the limit exists. For eachω∈Ω, theindex of compactnessforω is defined as κ(ω) := lim n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω ‖ ic(X) , whenever the limit exists. Whenever we want to emphasize the dependence on R, we will writeλ R (ω)andκ R (ω). 8 Lemma 2.4.LetRbe as in Definition 2.3.λ(ω)is well defined forP-almost everyω. The functionω7→λ(ω)is measurable andσ-invariant. Proof.The sequence of functions{log‖L (n) ω ‖} n∈N is subadditive. That is, log‖L (m+n) ω ‖≤log‖L (m) σ n ω ‖+ log‖L (n) ω ‖. Since the composition of strongly measurable maps is strongly measurable by Lemma A.5, and the setsL r (X) ={A∈L(X) :‖A‖≤r}areSmeasurable by Lemma A.2(1), then the mapω7→ ‖L (n) ω ‖is measurable. Measurability of the mapω7→lim n→∞ sup 1 n log‖L (n) ω ‖follows. By Kingman’s subadditive theorem \[33\], the limit lim n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω ‖exists forP-almost everyω∈Ω, and it is σ-invariant. Lemma 2.5.LetRbe as in Definition 2.3. The index of compactness is finite, submultiplicative and measurable, whenL(X)is equipped with the strongσ- algebraS. Thus,κ(ω)is well defined forP-almost everyω. The functionω7→ κ(ω)is measurable andσ-invariant. Proof.The index of compactness is bounded by the norm. Submultiplicativity is straightforward to check. To showS-measurability of the index of compactness, we present the argument given in Lian and Lu \[35\]. Let{x i } i∈N be a dense subset ofXand{y j } j∈N be a dense subset ofB(X). LetUbe the (countable) set of finite subsets of{x i } i∈N . LetU= ⋃ i∈N U i . Then, one can check that {A∈L(X) :‖A‖ ic(X) < r}= ∞ ⋃ n=2 ∞ ⋃ i=i ∞ ⋂ j=1 ⋃ x∈U i {A:‖A(y j )−x‖<(1−1/n)r}, (see \[35, Lemma 6.5\] for a proof.) Hence,A7→‖A‖ ic(X) isS-measurable. Thus, P-almost everywhere existence, measurability andσ-invariance ofκfollow just like in the proof of Lemma 2.4. Remark 2.6.IfRhas an ergodic base, thenλandκareP-almost everywhere constant. We call these constantsλ ∗ (R)andκ ∗ (R), or simplyλ ∗ andκ ∗ if Ris clear from the context. It follows from the definitions thatκ ∗ ≤λ ∗ . The assumption ∫ log + ‖L ω ‖dP(ω)<∞implies thatλ ∗ <∞. Definition 2.7.A strongly measurable random linear system with ergodic base is calledquasi-compactifκ ∗ < λ ∗ . 2.2 Construction of Oseledets splitting The following theorem was obtained by Doan Thai Son \[13\] as a corollary of the two-sided Oseledets theorem proved by Lian and Lu \[35\]. Theorem 2.8(Son \[13\]).LetR= (Ω,F,σ,P,X,L)be a strongly measurable random linear system with ergodic base. Assume thatlog + ‖L(ω)‖∈L 1 (Ω,F,P) 9 and thatRis quasi-compact. Then, there exists1≤l≤∞, numbersλ ∗ =λ 1 > ···> λ l > κ ∗ (or in the casel=∞,λ 1 > λ 2 > ... > κ ∗ ;lim n→∞ λ n =κ ∗ ), the exceptional Lyapunov exponents ofR, multiplicitiesm 1 ,...,m l , and a filtration X=V 1 (ω)⊃...⊃V l (ω)⊃V l+1 (ω)of finite-codimensional subspaces (in the casel=∞we haveV 1 (ω)⊃V 2 (ω)⊃...) defined on a fullP-measure,σ- invariant subset ofΩsatisfying: 1. For every1≤j≤l,L ω V j (ω)⊆V j (σω), and the codimension ofV j+1 (ω) inV j (ω)ism j . Furthermore,L ω V l+1 (ω)⊆V l+1 (σω). 2. For every1≤j≤landv∈V j (ω)\\V j+1 (ω), lim n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω v‖=λ j . For everyv∈V l+1 (ω), lim sup n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω v‖≤κ ∗ . Remark 2.9.Combining the result of Lian and Lu \[35\] with Lemma B.15 and the proof of \[13\], we obtain that the spacesV j (ω)forming the filtration given by Theorem 2.8 depend measurably onω. The main result of this section is the following. Theorem 2.10(Semi-invertible operator Oseledets theorem). LetR= (Ω,F,P,σ,X,L)be a strongly measurable random linear system with ergodic invertible base. Assume thatlog + ‖L(ω)‖ ∈L 1 (Ω,F,P)and thatRis quasi-compact. Letλ ∗ =λ 1 >···> λ l > κ ∗ be the exceptional Lyapunov exponents ofR, andm 1 ,...,m l ∈Nthe corresponding multiplicities (or in the casel=∞,λ 1 > λ 2 > ...withm 1 ,m 2 ,...the multiplicities). Then, up toP-null sets, there exists a unique, measurable, equivariant split- ting ofXinto closed subspaces,X=V(ω)⊕ ⊕ l j=1 Y j (ω), where possiblyV(ω) is infinite dimensional anddimY j (ω) =m j . Furthermore, for everyy∈Y j (ω)\\ {0},lim n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω y‖=λ j , for everyv∈V(ω),lim sup n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω v‖≤ κ ∗ and the norms of the projections associated to the splitting are tempered with respect toσ(where a functionf: Ω→Ris called tempered if forP-almost every ω,lim n→±∞ 1 n log|f(σ n ω)|= 0). The proof of 2.10 occupies the rest of the section. First, we present Lemma 2.11, that allows us to choose complementary spaces in the filtration of Theorem 2.8. Then, Lemma 2.12 provides an inductive step that establishes the proof of Theorem 2.10. Lemma 2.11(Existence of a good complement).Let the filtrationV 1 (ω)⊃ ...⊃V l+1 (ω)be as in Theorem 2.8. Then, for every1≤j≤l, there existm j dimensional spacesU j (ω)such that the following conditions hold. 10 1. ForP-almost everyω∈Ω,V j+1 (ω)⊕U j (ω) =V j (ω). 2. The mapω7→U j (ω)is(F,B G (X))measurable. Forj= 1, letU <j (ω) ={0}, and for1< j≤l, letU <j (ω) = ⊕ j−1 i=1 U i (ω). Then, 3.‖Π U j ‖V j+1 ⊕U <j (·) ‖,‖Π V j+1 ‖U j ⊕U <j (·) ‖∈L ∞ (Ω,F,P). Proof of Lemma 2.11.We present the proof whereXis a uniformly convex Banach space, as the construction of the complementsU(ω) is somewhat more explicit, which could be useful for numerical simulations. The general proof could proceed by using separability ofG k (X), established in Lemma B.12, to selectU(ω) in a similar way to that used in the proof below. We proceed by induction onj. Fix some 1≤j≤l. Ifj >1, assume the statement has been obtained for 1≤j ′ < j. LetV(ω) =V j (ω),V + (ω) = V j+1 (ω) andk=m j . Also, letU − (ω) ={0}ifj= 1 andU − (ω) = ⊕ j ′ <j U j ′ (ω) ifj >1. Let{x i } i∈N be a countable dense subset of the unit sphere inX. Let us recall that ifXis a uniformly convex Banach space andW⊂Xis a closed subspace, then for eachx∈X, there is a unique nearest point ofW tox. We call this pointρ W (x). As proved in Lemma B.22, this map depends continuously onx. Also, recall that ifW,W ′ are closed subspaces ofXsuch thatW ′ $W, there existsw∈Wsuch that‖w‖= 1 andd(w,W ′ ) = 1. Let >0 be small. Conditions on the smallness ofwill be found along the proof. For 1≤l≤k, we define in a recursive manner ̃u l (ω) =x r by r= min{i∈N:d(x i ,V + (ω)⊕span(u 1 (ω),...,u l−1 (ω))>1−,d(x i ,V(ω))< }, where in the casel= 1 the span is simply{0}. Letu l (ω) =ρ V(ω) ( ̃u l (ω)). Then, 1− <‖u l (ω)‖<1 +. LetU(ω) = span(u 1 (ω),...,u k (ω)). Then,U(ω)⊂V(ω). Proof of(1). By definition, for each 1≤l < k,d(u l+1 (ω),span(u 1 (ω),...,u l (ω))>1−2. Hence, if < 1 2 , dimU(ω) =k. We can show thatU(ω)∩V + (ω) ={0}as follows. Letx∈U(ω)∩V + (ω). Writex= ∑ k i=1 a i u i (ω), letM= max i 3 i |a i |and letjbe such thatM= 3 j |a j |. Then, 0 =d(x,V + (ω))≥d ( j ∑ i=1 a i u i (ω),V + (ω) ) − ∥ ∥ ∥ k ∑ i=j+1 a i u i (ω) ∥ ∥ ∥ ≥d ( a j ̃u j (ω),V + (ω)⊕span(u 1 (ω),...,u j−1 (ω)) ) −|a j |‖u j (ω)− ̃u j (ω)‖− ∥ ∥ ∥ k ∑ i=j+1 a i u i (ω) ∥ ∥ ∥ ≥|a j |(1−2)−(1 +)M ( k ∑ i=j+1 3 −i ) ≥M3 −j (1−5)/2. 11 Hence, if < 1 5 , we get thatM= 0 so that all of thea i are 0 andU(ω)∩ V + (ω) ={0}. Therefore,V + (ω)⊕U(ω) =V(ω). Proof of(2). It follows from the choice of ̃u l (ω) that the set{ω: ̃u l (ω) =x r }is measurable for eachr. Therefore the mapsω7→ ̃u l (ω) are (F,B(X)) measurable. Lemma B.22 shows that the functionρ:X×G k (X)→Xgiven byρ(x,V) =ρ V (x) is con- tinuous. Hence, the mapω7→u l (ω) =ρ( ̃u l (ω),V(ω)) is (F,B(X)) measurable, in view of Remark 2.9. It follows from the choice ofu j (ω) that the sets{u 1 (ω),...,u k (ω)}are 2-nice bases forU(ω) (see Definition B.2 on page 36). Using Corollary B.6 we conclude that ifis sufficiently small, the mapω7→U(ω) is (F,B G (X)) measurable. Proof of(3). The maps Π U j ‖V j+1 ⊕U <j (·) ,Π V j+1 ‖U j ⊕U <j (·) : (Ω,F)→(L(X),S) are measur- able by Remark B.19 and Lemma B.20. Observe that Π U‖V + ⊕U − (ω) + Π V + ‖U⊕U − (ω) = Π V‖U − (ω) = Π V j ‖U <j (ω) ◦···◦Π V 2 ‖U <2 (ω) , which is bounded by the inductive hypothesis. Hence, in order to show (3), it suffices to show that‖Π U‖V + ⊕U − (ω) ‖is bounded. Moreover, Π U‖V + ⊕U − (ω) = Π U‖V + (ω) ◦Π V j ‖U <j (ω) ◦···◦Π V 2 ‖U <2 (ω) , where Π U‖V + (ω) :V(ω)→U(ω). Hence, in order to show that‖Π U‖V + ⊕U − (ω) ‖ is bounded, it suffices to show that‖Π U‖V + (ω) ‖is bounded, by the inductive hypothesis. Letx∈V(ω) =U(ω)⊕V + (ω) and writex=u+vwithu= ∑ k i=1 a i u i (ω)∈ U(ω) andv∈V + (ω). Recall that 1− <‖u l (ω)‖<1 +for every 1≤l≤k. Then, ‖Π U‖V + (ω) (x)‖=‖u‖≤(1 +)kmax 1≤i≤k |a i |. As before, letM= max i 3 i |a i |and letjbe such thatM= 3 j |a j |. Then, by the argument used in the proof of (1), we have ‖x‖≥d(u,V + (ω))≥d ( j ∑ i=1 a i u i (ω),V + (ω) ) − ∥ ∥ ∥ k ∑ i=j+1 a i u i (ω) ∥ ∥ ∥ ≥M3 −j (1−5)/2≥max 1≤i≤k |a i |3 −k (1−5)/2, Hence‖Π U‖V + (ω) ‖≤ 2(1+)k 3 −k (1−5) , which gives a bound, provided < 1 5 . As before, fix some 1≤j≤land letV(ω) =V j (ω),V + (ω) =V j+1 (ω), k=m j = codim(V + ,V),λ=λ j andμ=λ j+1 . 12 Lemma 2.12.LetR= (Ω,F,P,σ,X,L)be a strongly measurable random lin- ear system with ergodic invertible base. Letlog + ‖L(ω)‖∈L 1 (Ω,F,P)andRbe quasi-compact. LetU(ω)be a good complement ofV + (ω)inV(ω), as provided by Lemma 2.11. Forn≥0, letY (n) (ω) =L (n) σ −n ω U(σ −n ω). Then, forP-almost everyωthe following holds. 1. (Convergence) Asn→ ∞,Y (n) (ω)converges to ak-dimensional space Y(ω), which depends measurably onω. 2. (Equivariant complement)V + (ω)⊕Y(ω) =V(ω). Hence, for ally∈ Y(ω)\\{0},lim n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω y‖=λ. Furthermore,L ω Y(ω) =Y(σω). 3. (Uniqueness)Y(ω)is independent of the choice ofU(ω). Let ̃ Y(ω) = ⊕ i≤j Y i (ω). Then, 4. (Temperedness) The norms of projectionsΠ 1 (ω) := Π V + ‖ ̃ Y(ω) andΠ 2 (ω) := Π ̃ Y‖V + (ω) are tempered with respect toσ. Before proceeding to the proof of Lemma 2.12, let us collect some facts that will be used in it. Forj= 1, letU − (ω) ={0}, and for 1< j≤l, letU − (ω) = ⊕ j−1 i=1 U i (ω). Then, we have that Π V‖U − (ω) = Π V + ‖U⊕U − (ω) + Π U‖V + ⊕U − (ω) . Also, by invariance ofV(ω) underL ω , we have that L ω ◦Π V‖U − (ω) = (Π V + ‖U⊕U − (σω) +Π U‖V + ⊕U − (σω) )L ω (Π V + ‖U⊕U − (ω) +Π U‖V + ⊕U − (ω) ). Let L 00 (ω) = Π V + ‖U⊕U − (σω) L ω Π V + ‖U⊕U − (ω) , L 01 (ω) = Π U‖V + ⊕U − (σω) L ω Π V + ‖U⊕U − (ω) , L 10 (ω) = Π V + ‖U⊕U − (σω) L ω Π U‖V + ⊕U − (ω) , L 11 (ω) = Π U‖V + ⊕U − (σω) L ω Π U‖V + ⊕U − (ω) . Note that by invariance ofV + ,L 01 (ω) = 0,P-almost surely. Therefore,L ω ◦ Π V‖U − (ω) =L 00 (ω) +L 10 (ω) +L 11 (ω). LetL (n) 00 (ω) = Π V + ‖U⊕U − (σ n ω) L (n) ω Π V + ‖U⊕U − (ω) , and define operatorsL (n) 01 (ω) andL (n) 11 (ω) analogously. It is straightforward to verify the following identities. L (n) 00 (ω) =L 00 (σ n−1 ω)...L 00 (ω),(L 00 ) L (n) 11 (ω) =L 11 (σ n−1 ω)...L 11 (ω).(L 11 ) By induction, we also have that L (n) 10 (ω) = n−1 ∑ i=0 L (i) 00 (σ n−i ω)L 10 (σ n−i−1 ω)L (n−i−1) 11 (ω).(L 10 ) Sublemma 2.13.Under the assumptions of Lemma 2.12, the following state- ments hold. 13 1. ForP-almost everyω∈Ω, lim n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) 00 (ω)‖≤μ. Furthermore, for every >0andP-almost everyω∈Ω, there exists D 1 (ω)<∞such that for everyi≥0, ‖L (i) 00 (σ −i ω)‖≤D 1 (ω)e i(μ+) . Applying this withωreplaced byσ n ωwe obtain ‖L (i) 00 (σ n−i ω)‖≤D 1 (σ n ω)e i(μ+) . 2. For every >0andP-almost everyω∈Ω, there existsD 2 (ω)<∞such that for everyn∈Z, ‖L 10 (σ n ω)‖≤D 2 (ω)e |n| . 3. ForP-almost everyω∈Ω, and everyu∈U(ω)\\{0}, lim n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) 11 (ω)u‖=λ. In particular,L 11 (ω)| U(ω) :U(ω)→U(σω)is invertible forP-almost every ω. Furthermore, for every >0andP-almost everyω∈Ω, there exists C(ω)<∞such that for everyn≥0, and everyu∈U(σ −n ω)satisfying ‖u‖= 1 ‖L (n) 11 (σ −n ω)u‖≥C(ω)e n(λ−) . Proof. Proof of(1). From the definition,‖L (n) 00 (ω)‖≤‖Π V + ‖U⊕U − (σ n ω) ‖‖L (n) ω | V + (ω) ‖‖Π V + ‖U⊕U − (ω) ‖. By Theorem 2.8, we have that lim n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω | V + (ω) ‖=μ. Using that Π V + ‖U⊕U − (ω) is tempered with respect toσ, which follows from Lemma 2.11(3), we get that forP-almost everyω, lim n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) 00 (ω)‖≤μ. The second claim follows exactly like Claim C in the predecessor paper, \[18\]. Proof of(2). ‖L 10 (σ n ω)‖ ≤ ‖Π V + ‖U⊕U − (σ n+1 ω) ‖‖L σ n ω ‖‖Π U‖V + ⊕U − (σ n ω) ‖. Since log + ‖L ω ‖ is integrable with respect toP, using the Birkhoff ergodic theorem, one sees that lim n→±∞ 1 |n| log‖L σ n ω ‖= 0 forP-almost everyω. Using again that 14 Π U‖V + ⊕U − (ω) and Π V + ‖U⊕U − (ω) are tempered with respect toσ, we get that forP-almost everyω, lim n→±∞ 1 |n| log‖L 10 (σ n ω)‖= 0. Thus, the claim follows. Proof of(3). We use the bases{u 1 (ω),...,u k (ω)}and{u 1 (σω),...,u k (σω)}constructed in the proof of Lemma 2.11 to expressL 11 | U(ω) :U(ω)→U(σω) in matrix form. Recall that the norms of{u 1 (ω),...,u k (ω)}are bounded functions ofω. Also from the proof of Lemma 2.11(1), we have that ∥ ∥ ∥ k ∑ i=1 a i u i (ω) ∥ ∥ ∥ ≥ 3 −k (1−5) 2 max 1≤i≤k |a i |. Condition (3) of Lemma 2.11 implies that the multiplicative ergodic theorem of Oseledets \[38\] applies toL 11 . Hence, convergence of 1 n log‖L (n) 11 (ω)u‖follows from Equation (L 11 ). Call this limit Λ. Thus, for every >0 there exists a constantD(ω,u)<∞such that‖L (n) 11 (ω)u‖≤D(ω,u)e n(Λ+) . On the one hand, by definition and invariance ofV(ω), we have that L (n) 11 (ω) = Π U‖V + ⊕U − (σ n ω) L (n) ω Π U‖V + ⊕U − (ω) = Π U‖V + ⊕U − (σ n ω) L (n) ω | V(ω) Π U‖V + ⊕U − (ω) . Therefore, Λ = lim n→∞ 1 n log + ‖L (n) 11 (ω)u‖ ≤lim n→∞ 1 n ( log + ‖Π U‖V + ⊕U − (σ n ω) ‖+ log + ‖L (n) ω | V(ω) ‖+ log + ‖Π U‖V + ⊕U − (ω) ‖ ) =λ. The last equality follows from Theorem 2.8 and temperedness of Π U‖V + ⊕U − (ω) with respect toσ. On the other hand, for anyu∈U(ω)\\{0}, ‖L (n) ω u‖=‖L (n) 10 (ω)u+L (n) 11 (ω)u‖≤‖L (n) 10 (ω)u‖+‖L (n) 11 (ω)u‖ = ∥ ∥ ∥ n−1 ∑ i=0 L (i) 00 (σ n−i ω)L 10 (σ n−i−1 ω)L (n−i−1) 11 (ω)u ∥ ∥ ∥ +‖L (n) 11 (ω)u‖ ≤ n−1 ∑ i=0 ∥ ∥ L (i) 00 (σ n−i ω) ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ L 10 (σ n−i−1 ω) ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ L (n−i−1) 11 (ω)u ∥ ∥ +‖L (n) 11 (ω)u‖. 15 Let us estimate the first sum. In view of parts (1) and (2), we have that n−1 ∑ i=0 ∥ ∥ L (i) 00 (σ n−i ω) ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ L 10 (σ n−i−1 ω) ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ L (n−i−1) 11 (ω)u ∥ ∥ ≤D 1 (σ n ω)D 2 (ω)D(ω,u) n−1 ∑ i=0 e i(μ+) e (n−i−1) e (Λ+)(n−i−1) ≤D 1 (σ n ω)D 2 (ω)D(ω,u) n−1 ∑ i=0 e (n−1)(max(Λ,μ)+2) . LetM >0 be such thatP(D 1 (ω)< M)>0. Then, by ergodicity ofσ, for P-almost everyω, there are infinitely manynsuch thatD 1 (σ n ω)< M. For every suchnwe have that ‖L (n) 10 (ω)u‖≤MD 2 (ω)D(ω,u)ne (n−1)(max(Λ,μ)+2) . Hence, lim inf n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) 10 (ω)u‖≤max(Λ,μ). By definition of Λ, we also know that lim n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) 11 (ω)u‖= Λ. Therefore, λ= lim n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω u‖≤max(Λ,μ). Recalling thatμ < λ, we get thatλ≤Λ. Combining with the argument above, we conclude thatλ= Λ as claimed. The almost-everywhere invertibility ofL 11 (ω)| U(ω) follows immediately. The last statement follows as in the case of matrices in the predecessor paper \[18, Lemma 8.3\]. The following lemma will be useful in the proof of Lemma 2.12(3). Lemma 2.14.AssumeY ′ (ω)is a measurable equivariant complement ofV + (ω) inV(ω). From Theorem 2.8, for everyy ′ ∈Y ′ (ω)\\{0},lim n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω y ′ ‖= λ. Furthermore, for every >0andP-almost everyω∈Ω, there exists C ′ (ω)>0such that for everyn≥0, and everyy ′ ∈Y ′ (ω)satisfying‖y ′ ‖= 1, ‖L (n) ω y ′ ‖≥C ′ (ω)e n(λ−) . Proof.The proof follows from the corresponding statement for matrices due to Barreira and Silva \[5\], as in \[19, Lemma 19\], with the only difference being the choice of suitable bases forY ′ (ω), which in our setting may be done in a measurable way similar to that used for the proof of Lemma 2.11. 16 Proof of Lemma 2.12. Proof of(1). The proof follows closely that presented in \[18, Theorem 4.1\], for the case of matrices. First, we define g n (ω) =max u∈U(ω),‖u‖=1 ‖L (n) 10 (σ −n ω)u‖ ‖L (n) 11 (σ −n ω)u‖ . Then, using the characterizations from (L 11 ) and (L 10 ) together with invertibil- ity ofL 11 (ω), we have that g n (ω)≤ n−1 ∑ i=0 max u∈U(σ −i−1 ω),‖u‖=1 ‖L i 00 (σ −i ω)L 10 (σ −i−1 ω)u‖ min u∈U(σ −i−1 ω),‖u‖=1 ‖L i+1 11 (σ −i−1 ω)u‖ . Let < λ−μ 4 . Using Sublemma 2.13, we have that forP-almost everyω, there is a constantC ′ (ω)<∞such that g n (ω)≤C ′ (ω) n−1 ∑ i=0 e (μ−λ+3)i . Hence,M(ω) := sup n∈N g n (ω)<∞forP-almost everyω. Next, we show that the sequence of subspacesY (n) (ω) =L (n) σ −n ω U(σ −n ω) forms a Cauchy sequence inG k (X). Letm > n. By homogeneity of the norm, the expression max{sup x∈Y (n) (ω)∩B d(x,Y (m) (ω)∩B),sup x∈Y (m) (ω)∩B d(x,Y (n) (ω)∩B)} coincides with max{sup x∈Y (n) (ω)∩S(X) d(x,Y (m) (ω)∩B),sup x∈Y (m) (ω)∩S(X) d(x,Y (n) (ω)∩B)}, whereS(X) is the unit sphere inX. First, letx∈Y (n) (ω)∩S(X). Thenx=L (n) σ −n ω u, withu∈U(σ −n ω). Since L (m−n) 11 (σ −m ω) is invertible forP-almost everyω, there existsu ′ ∈U(σ −m ω) such thatL (m−n) σ −m ω u ′ =u+v, for somev∈V + (σ −n ω). Sincev=L (m−n) 10 (σ −m ω)u ′ andu=L (m−n) 11 (σ −m ω)u ′ , we have that‖v‖≤M(σ −n ω)‖u‖. Lety=L (m) σ −m ω u ′ ∈Y (m) (ω). Then,y=x+L (n) σ −n ω (v). Also,‖L (n) σ −n ω (v)‖≤ D 1 (ω)e n(μ+) M(σ −n ω)‖u‖, withD 1 (ω) as in Sublemma 2.13(1). Using Sub- lemma 2.13(3), we also have that 1 =‖x‖=‖L (n) σ −n ω u‖≥C(ω)e n(λ−) ‖u‖. LettingK(ω) = D 1 (ω) C(ω) andα=λ−μ−2, we get thatd(x,Y (m) (ω))≤‖y−x‖= ‖L (n) σ −n ω (v)‖ ≤K(ω)M(σ −n ω)e −αn . By the triangle inequality,d(x,Y (m) (ω)∩ B)≤2d(x,Y (m) (ω)). Therefore, d(x,Y (m) (ω)∩B)≤2K(ω)M(σ −n ω)e −αn .(5) 17 Second, lety∈Y (m) (ω)∩S(X). Then,y=L (m) σ −m ω u ′ for someu ′ ∈ U(σ −m ω). LetL (m−n) σ −m ω u ′ =u+v, withu∈U(σ −n ω) andv∈V + (σ −n ω). Using once again the definition ofM(ω) at the beginning of the proof, we have that‖v‖≤M(σ −n ω)‖u‖, combined with Sublemma 2.13 we obtain that ‖L (n) σ −n ω v‖≤K(ω)M(σ −n ω)e −αn ‖L (n) σ −n ω u‖. On the other hand, sinceL (n) σ −n ω (u+v) =y, we have ‖L (n) σ −n ω u‖≤‖y‖+‖L (n) σ −n ω v‖≤1 +K(ω)M(σ −n ω)e −αn ‖L (n) σ −n ω u‖. Therefore, wheneverK(ω)M(σ −n ω)e −αn <1, we have ‖L (n) σ −n ω u‖≤ 1 1−K(ω)M(σ −n ω)e −αn . SinceL (n) σ −n ω u∈Y (n) (ω), we have d(y,Y (n) (ω))≤‖y−L (n) σ −n ω u‖=‖L (n) σ −n ω v‖≤ K(ω)M(σ −n ω)e −αn 1−K(ω)M(σ −n ω)e −αn . As before, we use the triangle inequality to conclude that d(y,Y (n) (ω)∩B)≤ 2K(ω)M(σ −n ω)e −αn 1−K(ω)M(σ −n ω)e −αn .(6) Combining (5) and (6), we get that d(Y (n) (ω),Y (m) (ω))≤ 2K(ω)M(σ −n ω)e −αn 1−K(ω)M(σ −n ω)e −αn . Therefore, d(Y (m ′ ) (ω),Y (m) (ω))≤ 4K(ω)M(σ −n ω)e −αn 1−K(ω)M(σ −n ω)e −αn for everym,m ′ > n, providedK(ω)M(σ −n ω)e −αn <1. SinceM(ω)<∞forP-almost everyω, there exists anA >0 such that P(M(ω)< A)>0. By ergodicity ofσ, forP-almost everyω, there exist arbitrarily large values ofnfor whichM(σ n ω)< A, proving thatY (m) (ω) is a Cauchy sequence. Therefore, it is convergent. Let us call its limitY(ω). Measurability ofY (n) (ω) comes from Corollary B.14. Hence, measurabil- ity ofY(ω) follows from the fact that the pointwise limit of Borel-measurable functions from a measurable space to a metric space is Borel-measurable. Proof of(2). By closedness ofG k (X), we know thatY(ω)∈ G k (X). SinceY(ω) is the limit of subspaces ofV(ω) andV(ω) is closed, it follows thatY(ω)⊂V(ω). We also have thatV + (ω) is ak-codimensional subspace ofV(ω). Hence, to show 18 thatY(ω)⊕V + (ω) =V(ω), we must show thatY(ω)∩V + (ω) ={0}. Let x∈Y (n) (ω), with‖x‖= 1. Then,x=L (n) σ −n ω u ′ for someu ′ ∈U(σ −n ω). Writing x=u+v, withu∈U(ω),v∈V + (ω), we have that‖v‖ ≤M(ω)‖u‖. Thus, 1 =‖x‖≤‖u‖(1+M(ω)), which yields‖u‖≥ 1 1+M(ω) . Since this holds for every n, everyx∈Y(ω) with‖x‖= 1 when decomposed asx=u+vwithu∈U(ω), v∈V + (ω), also satisfies‖u‖≥ 1 1+M(ω) . ThereforeY(ω)∩V + (ω) ={0}. The second statement follows directly from Theorem 2.8. To show invariance, we observe thatL ω Y (n) (ω) =Y (n+1) (σω). Also, by the previous argument combined with Sublemma 2.13 , we have that for everyn≥0, (L ω ,Y (n) (ω))∈G(N,k,0) for someN >0 (see notation of Lemma B.13), and (L ω ,Y(ω))∈G(N,k,0) as well. Hence, by Lemma B.13, lim n→∞ L ω Y (n) (ω) = L ω Y(ω). Thus,L ω (Y(ω)) =Y(σω). Proof of(3). LetY − (ω) = ⊕ i<j Y i (ω). AssumeY ′ (ω) is a measurable equivariant comple- ment ofV + (ω) inV(ω). We will show thatY ′ (ω) =Y(ω) forP-almost every ω∈Ω. LetR(ω) = Π V + ‖Y⊕Y − (ω) . Remark B.19 and Lemma B.20 imply thatR is (F,S) measurable. Leth(ω) =‖R(ω)| Y ′ (ω) ‖. Then,his non-negative and, in view of Lemma B.16,his (S,B(R)) measurable. We claim that forP-almost everyω, lim n→∞ h(σ n ω) = 0. We will show this in the next paragraph. Given this, we can finish the proof as follows. Let E i ={ω:h(ω)≤ 1 i }. The claim implies thatP-almost everyω,σ n ω∈E i for sufficiently largen. Hence, by the Poincar ́e recurrence theorem,P(Ω\\E i ) = 0 for alli∈N, and therefore, sincehis non-negative,h(ω) = 0 forP-almost every ω. This implies thatY ′ (ω)⊂Y(ω)⊕Y − (ω). On the other hand,Y(ω),Y ′ (ω)⊂ V(ω), and by part (2),V(ω)∩Y − (ω) ={0}. SoY ′ (ω)⊂Y(ω). SinceY(ω) and Y ′ (ω) have the same dimension,Y ′ (ω) =Y(ω) as claimed. The proof of lim n→∞ h(σ n ω) = 0 proceeds as in \[19,§3.2\]. Lety ′ ∈Y ′ (ω)\\ {0}. SinceR(ω)y ′ ∈V + (ω), Sublemma 2.13(1) implies that for every >0, there exists someD ′ (ω)<∞such that‖L (n) ω R(ω)y ′ ‖ ≤D ′ (ω)e n(μ+) ‖y ′ ‖. By Remark 2.14, for every >0, there exists someC ′ (ω)>0 such that‖L (n) ω y ′ ‖≥ C ′ (ω)e n(λ−) ‖y ′ ‖. Let < λ−μ 4 . Then, ‖L (n) ω R(ω)y ′ ‖ ‖L (n) ω y ′ ‖ ≤ D ′ (ω) C ′ (ω) e −n(λ−μ−2) for everyn≥0. Consider the closed sets D N ={y ′ ∈Y ′ (ω) :‖L (n) ω R(ω)y ′ ‖≤Ne −n(λ−μ−2) ‖L (n) ω y ′ ‖for alln∈N}. Since ⋃ N∈N D N =Y ′ (ω), the Baire category principle implies that there exists N∈N,y ′ ∈Y ′ (ω) andδ >0 such that B δ (y ′ )∩Y ′ (ω)⊂D N . By linearity of L ω ,B 1 ( y ′ δ )∩Y ′ (ω)⊂D N . Letx∈Y ′ (ω) with‖x‖= 1. Then,‖L (n) ω R(ω)( y ′ δ +x)‖≤Ne −n(λ−μ−2) ‖L (n) ω ( y ′ δ + x)‖and‖L (n) ω R(ω)( y ′ δ )‖≤Ne −n(λ−μ−2) ‖L (n) ω ( y ′ δ )‖. By invariance ofV + (ω),Y(ω) andY − (ω), we see thatR(σ n ω)L (n) ω =L (n) ω R(ω). 19 Hence, ‖R(σ n ω)L (n) ω (x)‖≤Ne −n(λ−μ−2) ( ‖L (n) ω ( y ′ δ )‖+‖L (n) ω ( y ′ δ +x)‖ ) ≤2Ne −n(λ−μ−2) C ′′ (ω)e n(λ+) ( ‖ y ′ δ ‖+ 1 ) , where the existence of suchC ′′ (ω)<∞is guaranteed by Theorem 2.8. Further- more, using invariance ofY ′ (ω), we get thatL (n) ω (Y ′ (ω)) =Y ′ (σ n ω). Thus, h(σ n ω)≤ sup x∈Y ′ (ω)∩S 1 (X) ‖R(σ n ω)L (n) ω (x)‖ inf x∈Y ′ (ω)∩S 1 (X) ‖L (n) ω (x)‖ ≤ 2NC ′′ (ω)(‖ y ′ δ ‖+ 1) C ′ (ω) e −n(λ−μ−4) , where the last inequality follows from the existence of constantsC ′ (ω) and C ′′ (ω) as before. By the choice of, we get that lim n→∞ h(σ n ω) = 0 as claimed. Proof of(4). We want to show that fori= 1,2 andP-almost everyω∈Ω, the following holds lim n→±∞ 1 n log‖Π i (σ n ω)‖= 0. Since the maps Π i (ω) are projections to non-trivial subspaces, it follows that all the norms involved are at least 1. We will show upper bounds. In view of Lemma C.2, it suffices to show lim n→∞ 1 n log‖Π i (σ −n ω)‖= 0. It suffices to show that for eachj, lim n→∞ 1 n log‖Π Y j ||V j+1 (σ −n ω) ‖= 0, where the map is defined onV j (σ −n ω). Fixj, and suppose 1/nlog‖Π Y j ||V j+1 (σ −n ω) ‖ 6→0 asn→ ∞. Then there exists a sequencen 1 < n 2 < ...such that log‖Π Y j ||V j+1 (σ −n i ω) ‖> n i . Pickδ <min(/2,(λ j −λ j+1 )/2). Then, forP-almost everyω, there exist C(ω),D(ω) andE(ω) such that ‖L (n) (σ −n ω)| V j+1 ‖< C(ω)e (λ j+1 +δ)n for alln; ‖L (n) (σ −n ω)(y)‖> D(ω)e (λ j −δ)n for allnandy∈B∩Y j (σ −n ω); ‖L (n) (σ −n ω)| V j ‖< E(ω)e (λ j +δ)n for alln. Now by hypothesis there exists a sequencey n i +v n i ∈Y j (σ −n i ω)⊕V j+1 (σ −n i ω) with‖y n i ‖≈1,‖v n i ‖≈1, but‖y n i +v n i ‖< e −n i . Then, we have ‖L (n i ) (σ −n i ω)(y n i )‖> D(ω)e (λ j −δ)n i ; ‖L (n i ) (σ −n i ω)(v n i )‖< C(ω)e (λ j+1 +δ)n i ; ‖L (n i ) (σ −n i ω)(y n i +v n i )‖< E(ω)e (λ j +δ)n i ‖y n i +v n i ‖ < E(ω)e (λ j +δ−)n i . 20 The triangle inequality gives D(ω)e (λ j −δ)n i < E(ω)e (λ j +δ−)n i +C(ω)e (λ j+1 +δ)n i . Sinceλ j −δ >max(λ j +δ−,λ j+1 +δ) this gives a contradiction for suffi- ciently largen i . Hence, lim n→∞ 1 n log‖Π 2 (σ −n ω)‖= 0 forP-almost everyω, as claimed. Using that Π 1 + Π 2 = Id, the corresponding statement for Π 1 follows imme- diately. 3 Oseledets splittings for random Piecewise Ex- panding maps In this section, we present an application of the semi-invertible operator Os- eledets theorem, Theorem 2.10, to the setting of random piecewise expanding maps. It is worked out in considerable generality in the one-dimensional setting and in a special case in higher-dimensions, based on results of Cowieson. The main result of this section is Theorem 3.19. We first discuss the class of piecewise expanding maps and random piecewise expanding dynamical systems in§3.1. Then, fractional Sobolev spaces and some of their relevant properties are briefly reviewed in§3.2. In§3.3, we recall the definition of the transfer operator of a piecewise expanding map acting on a fractional Sobolev space. Strong measurability is established in the one- dimensional case. Quasi-compactness is proved in§3.5. Convention Throughout this section,C # will denote various constants that are allowed to depend only on parametersd,p,tandα, as well as on aC ∞ compactly supported functionη:R d →\[0,1\], that is chosen and fixed depending only on the dimensiond, as appears in Thomine \[44\] and Baladi and Gou ̈ezel \[2\]. 3.1 Random Piecewise Expanding Dynamical Systems Definition 3.1.A mapTis called apiecewise expandingC 1+α mapof a compact regionX 0 ⊂R d if: •There is a finite (ordered) collection of disjoint subsets ofX 0 ,O 1 ,...,O I , each connected and open inR d , whose boundaries are unions of finitely many compactC 1 hypersurfaces with boundary, and whose union agrees withX 0 up to a set of Lebesgue measure 0; •For each1≤i≤I,T| O i agrees with aC 1+α mapT i defined on a neigh- bourhood of O i such thatT i is a diffeomorphism onto its image. •There existsμ >1such that for allx∈O i ,‖DT i (x)(v)‖ ≥μ‖v‖for all v∈R d . 21 We defineb T :=Ito be the number of branches ofT. The collection {O 1 ,...,O I }is called thebranch partitionofT. The collection ofC 1+α expand- ing maps ofX 0 will be denoted PE 1+α (X 0 ). The collection ofC 1+α expanding maps with a particular branch partitionPwill be denoted by PE 1+α (X 0 ;P). In the special case whered= 1 andX 0 = \[0,1\], we denote the collection of maps satisfying the above conditions LY 1+α . In this case, the elements ofPare intervals. Finally, we define a metricd PE on PE 1+α (X 0 ) as follows. LetS,T∈ PE 1+α (X 0 ). Let the branches forSbe (O S i ) b S i=1 and forTbe (O T i ) b T i=1 (recall that a piecewise expanding map is assumed to consist of anorderedcollection of domains and maps). Ifb T 6=b S , orO S i ∩O T i =∅for somei, we define d PE (S,T) = 1. Otherwise we define d PE (S,T) = max i ‖(S i −T i )| O S i ∩O T i ‖ C 1+α +max i ∣ ∣ ∣ ‖S i ‖ C 1+α −‖T i ‖ C 1+α ∣ ∣ ∣ +max i d H (O S i ,O T i ), whered H denotes Hausdorff distance. In the one-dimensional case we call the metricd LY . We endow PE 1+α (X 0 ) with the Borelσ-algebra. Remark 3.2.There is a definition of distance for Lasota-Yorke maps, related to the Skorohod metric, that has been previously used in the literature; see for instance Keller and Liverani. \[29\]. That notion of distance is not adequate for our purposes, because it allows maps to behave badly in sets of small Lebesgue measure. Definition 3.3.ArandomC 1+α piecewise expanding dynamical system on a domainX 0 is given by a tuple(Ω,F,P,σ,T)where(Ω,F,P,σ)is a prob- ability measure-preserving transformation andT: Ω→PE 1+α (X 0 )satisfying R1. (Measurability)T: Ω→PE 1+α (X 0 )given byω7→T ω is a measurable function. R2. (Number of branches) The functionω7→b T ω isP-log-integrable,b T ω being the number of branches ofT ω . R3. (Distortion) There exists a constantDsuch that‖DT ω ‖ α ≤ DforP- almost everyω∈Ω. R4. (Minimum expansion) There existsa <1such that forP-almost every ω∈Ω,‖μ −1 T ω ‖ ∞ ≤a, whereμ T ω (x) := inf ‖v‖=1 ‖DT ω (x)v‖. R5. (Branch geometry) There exists a constantLsuch that forP-almost every ω∈Ω, each branch domainO i is bounded by at mostL C 1 hypersurfaces. A random piecewise expanding dynamical system will denote a randomC 1+α piecewise expanding dynamical system for some 0< α≤1. In the case where d= 1 andX 0 = \[0,1\], we refer to these systems asrandom Lasota-Yorke type dynamical systems. We will also refer to randomC 2 piecewise expand- ing dynamical systems (with the obvious definition). 22 3.2 Fractional Sobolev spaces Here we introduce spaces of functions suitable for our purposes. Their choice is motivated by recent work of Baladi and Gou ̈ezel \[2\]. Much of the development in this subsection parallels that done in \[2\] (see also Thomine’s work \[44\], the specialization of \[2\] to the expanding case). While the other works consider the case of a single map, we work with ran- dom dynamical systems. One new feature is that we need to ensure the strong measurability of the family of Perron-Frobenius operators. In the context of a single map, it is often sufficient to prove inequalities with constants depending on the map, showing only that the constants are finite. A second new feature in the random context is that one needs to maintain control of the quantities describing compositions of maps as the inequalities are iterated. For this reason we give references to the earlier works where possible and emphasize those points where differences arise. Lett≥0 and 1< p <∞. LetH t p (R d ), or simplyH t p , be the image of L p (R d ) under the injective linear mapJ t :L p (R d )→L p (R d ) given by J t (g) =F −1 (a −t F(g)), whereFdenotes the Fourier transform, anda t (ζ) := (1 +|ζ| 2 ) t 2 .H t p endowed with the norm ‖f‖ H t p :=‖F −1 (a t F(f))‖ L p (R d ) is a Banach space known as (local) fractional Sobolev space. Thus,J t is a surjective isometry fromL p (R d ) toH t p . SinceL p (R d ) is separable, reflexive and uniformly convex (see Definition B.21), its isometric imageH t p is also separable, reflexive and uniformly convex. Also, the space of differentiable functions with compact support,C ∞ 0 (R d ), is dense inH t p . See for example Strichartz \[42\] and references therein for these and other properties ofH t p . We also recall a result from Baladi \[1, Lemma 2.2\] that the inclusionH t p ↪→L p (R d ) is compact. This subsection closely follows Baladi and Gou ̈ezel. In what follows, we assume thatp >1 and 0< t <min{α, 1 p }. The following properties will be used in the sequel. The first one is taken from Triebel \[45, Corollary 4.2.2\], and concerns multiplication by H ̈older functions. The second one is a refinement of a result of Strichartz \[42, Corollary II3.7\], and deals with multiplication by characteristic functions of intervals. The third one deals with multiplication by characteristic functions of higher dimensional sets. The last one is related to a result of Baladi and Gou ̈ezel \[2, Lemma 25\], about composition with smooth functions. Lemma 3.4(Multiplication byC α functions).(Triebel \[45, Corollary 4.2.2\]) There exists a constantC # , depending only ontandα, such that for anyg∈ C α (R d ,R), and for anyf∈H t p , we have thatfg∈H t p , with ‖gf‖ H t p ≤C # ‖g‖ C α ‖f‖ H t p . Lemma 3.5(Multiplication by characteristic functions in one dimension). 23 (a) (Strichartz \[42, Corollary II3.7\]) There exists some constantC # depend- ing only ontandpsuch that for everyf∈H t p , and intervalI ′ ⊂R, ‖1 I ′ f‖ H t p ≤C # ‖f‖ H t p . (b) Letf∈H t p . Then, for every >0there existsδ >0such that whenever I ′ ⊂Ris an interval of length at mostδ, then‖1 I ′ f‖ H t p ≤. Proof of (b).SinceC ∞ 0 (R) is dense inH t p , there exists (using part (a))g∈ C α (R)∩H t p such that‖1 I ′ (f−g)‖ H t p ≤/2 for all intervalsI ′ . By Lemma 3.4 we have‖1 I ′ g‖ H t p ≤C # ‖g‖ C α ‖1 I ′ ‖ H t p . IfI ′ is of length at mostδ, then ‖1 I ′ ‖ H t p ≤C # δ 1/p−t . Hence ifδ >0 is chosen sufficiently small we obtain that for all intervalsI ′ of length at mostδ,‖1 I ′ g‖ H t p ≤/2 completing the proof. Lemma 3.6(Multiplication by characteristic functions of nice sets). (a) (Strichartz \[42, Corollaries II3.7 and II4.2\]) There exists some constant C # depending only ontandpsuch that for every setO⊂R d intersecting almost every line parallel to some coordinate axis in at mostLconnected components, and for everyf∈H t p , we have that‖1 O f‖ H t p ≤C # L‖f‖ H t p . (b) (Sickel \[41, Proposition 4.8\]) LetPbe a branch partition as in Defini- tion 3.1. Then, there exists a constantCdepending onPsuch that for everyO∈Pand everyfinH t p ,1 O f∈H t p with‖1 O f‖ H t p ≤C‖f‖ H t p . Lemma 3.7(Composition withC 1 diffeomorphisms). (a) (Thomine \[44, Lemma 4.3\]) LetA:R d be a linear map. Then, there existsC # such that for anyf∈H t p , ‖f◦A‖ H t p ≤C # |detA| − 1 p ‖A‖ t ‖f‖ H t p +C # |detA| − 1 p ‖f‖ p . (b) LetF:R d be aC 1 diffeomorphism with‖DF‖ ∞ ,‖DF −1 ‖ ∞ <∞. Then, there existsC # such that for anyf∈H t p , ‖f◦F‖ H t p ≤C # ‖det(DF −1 )‖ 1 p ∞ max{1,‖DF‖ t ∞ }‖f‖ H t p . (c) Letf∈H t p . Then, for every >0there existsδ >0such that for every diffeomorphismF:R d →R d with‖F−Id‖ C 1 ≤δ, we have‖f◦F−f‖ H t p ≤ . Proof.Part (b) follows via interpolation; this result is related to Lemma 4.3 of Thomine \[44\]. Now we prove (c). Letf∈H t p . In view of part (b) and the density ofC ∞ 0 (R d ) inH t p , we can find ag∈C ∞ 0 such that‖f−g‖ H t p +‖(f−g)◦F‖ H t p < /2. This gives‖f◦F−f‖ H t p ≤/2 +‖g◦F−g‖ H t p . 24 We recall that fort≤s,H s p ⊆H t p , and the inclusion is continuous (see for example Strichartz \[42, Corollary I1.3\]). In particular, for eacht≤1, there exists a constantC # such that for everyg∈H 1 p ,‖g‖ H t p ≤C # ‖g‖ H 1 p . Sinceg∈C ∞ 0 (R d ),g,g◦F−g∈H 1 p . LetK= ( 1+‖det(DF −1 )‖ ∞ ) Leb(supp(g))<∞. Then ‖g◦F−g‖ H t p ≤C # ‖g−g◦F‖ H 1 p ≤C # (‖g◦F−g‖ L p +‖D(g◦F)−Dg‖ L p ) ≤C # K 1/p ( ‖Dg‖ ∞ ‖I−F‖ ∞ +‖D 2 g‖ ∞ ‖I−F‖ ∞ +‖Dg‖ ∞ ‖1−DF‖ ∞ ) , since Leb(supph)≤Kfor allh∈{g◦F−g,Dg◦F−Dg,Dg◦F·DF−Dg◦F}. Choosingδsufficiently small makes the last expression smaller than  2 and hence, ‖f◦F−f‖ H t p ≤. 3.3 Transfer operators Given a mapT∈PE 1+α (X 0 ) with branchesT i :O i →X 0 , we letQ i =T i (O i ) andξ i be the inverse branchT −1 i :Q i →O i . Assumep >1 and 0< t < min(α, 1 p ). We letH t p =H t p (X 0 )⊂H t p be the subspace of functions supported on the domainX 0 , with the induced norm‖f‖ H t p :=‖f‖ H t p . In view of Lemma 3.6, H t p is complete, and thus a Banach space. It is straightforward to see thatH t p is uniformly convex as well. As may be seen directly from Lemma 3.6,H t p is also separable. Remark 3.8.We note that the space of functions of bounded variation, which has been the most widely used Banach space to study Lasota-Yorke type maps, is not separable. This is the reason to look for alternatives. In Baladi and Gou ̈ezel \[2\], the authors show, in particular, that the fractional Sobolev spacesH t p , are suitable to study transfer operators associated to piecewise expanding maps. Definition 3.9.The transfer operator,L T :H t p , associated to a mapT∈ PE 1+α (X 0 )is defined for everyf∈H t p by L T f= b T ∑ i=1 ( 1 O T i ·f ) ◦ξ T i ·|Dξ T i |= b T ∑ i=1 1 Q T i ·f◦ξ T i ·|Dξ T i |, where|A|denotes the absolute value of the determinant of the linear mapA. Remark 3.10.The results of§3.2 imply that the linear operators correspond- ing to composition with smooth functions, multiplication by characteristic func- tions of elements of the branch partition and multiplication byC α functions are bounded inH t p . Clearly,H t p is invariant underL, and thus the transfer operator acts continuously onH t p . Furthermore, ifT∈PE 1+α is onto, then L T :H t p →H t p is onto. For example, givenf∈H t p and lettingg= |DT|·f◦T ∑ b T i=1 1 Q T i ◦T givesL T g=f. Again by the results above,g∈H t p . 25 The following lemma provides a weak continuity property of the transfer operator acting on a fractional Sobolev space for Lasota-Yorke maps. Lemma 3.11.LetL(H t p )be endowed with the strong operator topology and LY 1+α be endowed with the metricd LY 1+α . Then, the mapLsending a Lasota- Yorke map to its transfer operatorL:LY 1+α →L(H t p )given byT7→ L T is continuous. Proof.Letf∈ H t p andT∈LY 1+α . We will prove that lim S→T ‖L S f− L T f‖ H t p = 0.Letb=b T . Assumed LY 1+α (S,T)<1. Then, by definition of d LY 1+α ,b S =b. For each 1≤i≤b, letQ T∩S i =Q T i ∩Q S i andQ T\\S i =Q T i \\Q S i . Then, ∥ ∥ ∥ L T f−L S f ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p ≤ b ∑ i=1 ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 Q T∩S i (f◦ξ T i ·|Dξ T i |−f◦ξ S i ·|Dξ S i |) ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p + b ∑ i=1 ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 Q T\\S i ·f◦ξ T i ·|Dξ T i | ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p + b ∑ i=1 ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 Q S\\T i ·f◦ξ S i ·|Dξ S i | ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p . We finish the proof by bounding the terms separately in the following lemma. Sublemma 3.12. (I) Bound on common branches. For every1≤i≤b, lim S→T ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 Q T∩S i (f◦ξ T i ·|Dξ T i |−f◦ξ S i ·|Dξ S i |) ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p = 0. (II) Bound on remaining terms. For every1≤i≤b, lim S→T ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 Q T\\S i ·f◦ξ T i ·|Dξ T i | ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p = 0andlim S→T ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 Q S\\T i ·f◦ξ S i ·|Dξ S i | ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p = 0. Proof of Sublemma 3.12 (I).We start by noting that we can fix a way of choos- ing extensions of eachT i to a diffeomophism ̃ T i ofR, in such a way that ‖ ̃ S i − ̃ T i ‖ C 1+α ≤2‖(S i −T i )| Q S i ∩Q T i ‖ C 1+α . In what follows, we drop the tildes for convenience. Using Lemmas 3.4, 3.5 and 3.7 repeatedly, we have ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 Q T∩S i (f◦ξ T i ·|Dξ T i |−f◦ξ S i ·|Dξ S i |) ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p ≤C # ∥ ∥ ∥ f◦ξ T i ·|Dξ T i |−f◦ξ S i ·|Dξ S i | ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p ≤C # ∥ ∥ ∥ |Dξ T i |−|Dξ S i | ∥ ∥ ∥ C α ∥ ∥ ∥ f◦ξ T i ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p +C # ∥ ∥ ∥ Dξ S i ∥ ∥ ∥ C α ∥ ∥ ∥ f◦ξ T i −f◦ξ S i ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p ≤C # ( ∥ ∥ ∥ |Dξ T i |−|Dξ S i | ∥ ∥ ∥ C α ∥ ∥ ∥ f ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p ∥ ∥ ∥ DT i ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 p ∞ + ( ∥ ∥ ∥ Dξ T i ∥ ∥ ∥ C α + 1 ) ∥ ∥ ∥ f◦ξ T i −f◦ξ S i ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p ) , 26 whereT i := (ξ T i ) −1 , and in the last inequality we use the fact that ∥ ∥ Dξ S i ∥ ∥ C α < ∥ ∥ Dξ T i ∥ ∥ C α + 1 wheneverd LY 1+α (S,T)<1. The first term goes to 0 asS→Tbe- caused LY 1+α (S,T)≥ 1 2 ∥ ∥ |Dξ S i |−|Dξ T i | ∥ ∥ C α .It remains to show that lim S→T ∥ ∥ ∥ f◦ ξ T i −f◦ξ S i ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p = 0.By Lemma 3.7(b), showing the above is equivalent to proving that lim S→T ∥ ∥ ∥ f−f◦ξ S i ◦T i ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p = 0.This is a direct consequence of Lemma 3.7(c) and the observation that lim S→T ∥ ∥ ∥ ξ S i ◦T i −Id ∥ ∥ ∥ C 1 = 0. Proof of Sublemma 3.12 (II).Fix 1≤i≤b. First, we observe that Leb(Q S\\T i )≤ 2d H (Q S i ,Q T i )≤2(‖T‖ ∞ + 1)d LY 1+α (S,T). Sinceξ S i andξ T i are contracting, then lim S→T Leb ( ξ T i (Q T\\S i ) ) = 0andlim S→T Leb ( ξ S i (Q S\\T i ) ) = 0.(7) We now show that lim S→T ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 Q T\\S i ·f◦ξ T i ·|Dξ T i | ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p = 0. Being the set difference of two intervals, the setQ T\\S i is either empty, or an interval, or the union of two intervals. Thus, we letQ T\\S i = ⋃ γ i ∈Γ i Q T\\S γ i be the decomposition ofQ T\\S i into intervals, where #Γ i ∈{0,1,2}. Letγ i ∈Γ i . Using Lemmas 3.4 and 3.7(b), respectively, we obtain ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 Q T\\S γ i ·f◦ξ T i ·|Dξ T i | ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p ≤C # ∥ ∥ ∥ Dξ T i ∥ ∥ ∥ C α ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 Q T\\S γ i ·f◦ξ T i ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p ≤C # ∥ ∥ ∥ Dξ T i ∥ ∥ ∥ C α ∥ ∥ ∥ DT i ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 p ∞ ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 ξ T i (Q T\\S γ i ) f ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p . SinceQ T\\S γ i ⊆Q T\\S i , (7) implies that lim S→T Leb(ξ T i (Q T\\S γ i )) = 0. Lemma 3.5(b) yields lim S→T ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 ξ T i (Q T\\S γ i ) f ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p = 0.Therefore, lim S→T ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 Q T\\S γ i ·f◦ξ T i ·|Dξ T i | ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p = 0, as claimed. Although the statements of Lemma 3.12(II) are not symmetric in TandS, interchanging the roles ofTandSin the proof just presented, and recalling from (7) that lim S→T Leb(ξ S i (Q S\\T γ i )) = 0, we get that lim S→T ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 Q S\\T ·f◦ξ S i ·|Dξ S i | ∥ ∥ ∥ H t p = 0. LetT= (Ω,F,P,σ,T) be a random piecewise expandingC 1+α dynamical system. Suppose that the following conditions are satisfied. 27 S1. (Parameters)H t p is the fractional Sobolev space defined in§3.2, withp >1 and 0< t <min{α, 1 p }. S2. (Strong measurability) The mapLsendingωto the transfer operator of T ω ,L T ω , acting onH t p , is strongly measurable. Then we call the tuple (Ω,F,P,σ,H t p ,L) the strongly measurable random linear systemassociatedtoT. For brevity, we will use writeL ω instead ofL T ω . Also, the notation from§3.1 will be abbreviated. For example, instead ofb T ω , we will writeb ω , and so on. We note that Lemma 3.11 guarantees that for any randomC 1+α Lasota- Yorke dynamical system, condition \[S2\] is automatically satisfied. A second situation that we consider is that of a random piecewise expanding dynamical system in higher dimensions with a fixed, suitably regular branch partition. In this situation one sees directly that \[S2\] holds also. 3.4 Random Lasota-Yorke Inequalities Given a collectionCof subsets of a set, we recall that its intersection multi- plicity is given by max x∈ ⋃ C #{C∈ C:x∈C}. GivenT∈PE 1+α (X 0 ), the complexity ofTat the end, denoted byC e (T), is the intersection multiplicity of { T(O T i )} 1≤i≤b T . Thecomplexity ofTat the beginning,C b (T), is the intersection multiplicity of{ O T i } 1≤i≤b T . We note that in the one-dimensional Lasota-Yorke case,C b (T) is always equal to 2 (even when compositions of maps are taken), whereas in higher dimensions the complexity at the beginning can grow without bound as maps are composed. Examples of Tsujii \[46\] and Buzzi \[8\] show that this can lead to singular ergodic properties of the map including non-existence of absolutely continuous invariant measures. As is well-known, quasi-compactness can be derived from Lasota-Yorke type inequalities of the form|||Lf||| ≤A‖f‖+B|||f|||, where|||·|||is a stronger norm than‖·‖and the inclusion (Y,|||·|||)↪→(Y,‖·‖) is compact. Hennion’s theorem shows that the essential spectral radius is governed byB. The following Lasota-Yorke type inequality is based on results of Thomine \[44, Theorem 2.3\]. In that work, rather than a random dynamical system, a single dynamical system is considered. Thomine (and the previous work of Baladi and Gou ̈ezel) took a great deal of care to bound the ‘B’ term, but did not need to control the ‘A’ term other than to say that it is finite. In our context, we need the additional fact thatAdepends in a measurable way on our dynamical system. That this holds can be seen by a careful examination of the proofs of Thomine; and Baladi and Gou ̈ezel. One feature of the proof that needs attention is that these papers replace the norm‖·‖ H t p by an equivalent norm depending on properties of the mapT n . In our context, we would obtain results in different norms for different compositionsT (n) ω . We avoid this at the expense of increasing theAterm. More specifically we make use of a bound of 28 the form ∑ m∈Z ‖η m,r u‖ p H t p ≤C # ( (1 +r pt )‖u‖ p p +‖u‖ p H t p ) , where (η m,r ) m∈Z d is a partition of unity ofR d obtained by scaling a fixed parti- tion of unity by a factorrin the variable, and satisfiesη m,r (x) =η 0,r (x+m/r). Lemma 3.13(StrongL p −H t p Lasota-Yorke inequality). SupposeR= (Ω,F,P,σ,H t p ,L)is a strongly measurable random linear system associated to a randomC 1+α piecewise expanding dynamical systemT. Then there exists a constantC R , depending only onp,t,α,ηandL(from Definition 3.3), and a measurable functionA R,n (ω)such that for everyω∈Ω, we have ‖L (n) ω f‖ H t p ≤A R,n (ω)‖f‖ p +B R,n (ω)‖f‖ H t p ,(S-LY) where A R,n (ω)is a measurable function ofω;and B R,n (ω) =C R n ( C b (T (n) ω ) ) 1 p ( C e (T (n) ω ) ) 1− 1 p ‖|DT (n) ω | 1 p −1 μ −t ω,n ‖ ∞ , whereμ ω,n (x) := inf ‖v‖=1 ‖DT (n) ω (x)v‖. This inequality will prove sufficient to control the index of compactness, but does not give enough information to control the maximal Lyapunov exponent since we have no control of theA R,n (ω) term. The following inequality reme- dies the situation by providing an inequality with noAterm, at the expense of having a larger (but still log-integrable)Bterm. The availability of both inequalities will allow us to apply Lemma C.5. The proof of the weak Lasota- Yorke inequality is straightforward using some of the ingredients of the stronger version. Lemma 3.14(WeakL p −H t p Lasota-Yorke inequality). LetR= (Ω,F,P,σ,H t p ,L)be a random Lasota-Yorke type dynamical system. Then, for eachn∈Nthere exists aP-log-integrable function ̃ A R,n : Ω→Rsuch that for everyω∈Ω, ‖L (n) ω f‖ H t p ≤ ̃ A R,n (ω)‖f‖ H t p .(W-LY) 3.5 Quasi-compactness In this subsection we prove quasi-compactness by bootstrapping a strategy of Buzzi \[7\] based on multiple Lasota-Yorke inequalities as elaborated in Ap- pendix C.2. Lemma 3.15.LetR= (Ω,F,P,σ,T)be a random piecewise expanding dynam- ical system with ergodic base. Then the following hold: 29 1. There existC ∗ e <∞andC ∗ b <∞such that forP-almost everyω∈Ω, lim n→∞ (C e (T (n) ω )) 1 n =C ∗ e ;andlim n→∞ (C b (T (n) ω )) 1 n =C ∗ b ; 2. There existsχ <1such that forP-almost everyω∈Ω,lim n→∞ ‖μ −1 ω,n ‖ 1 n ∞ = χ.Furthermore,lim n→∞ ‖|DT (n) ω | −1 ‖ 1 n ∞ ≤χ d . Proof.The sequences (C e (T (n) ω )) n∈N , (C b (T (n) ω )) n∈N , (‖μ −1 ω,n ‖ ∞ ) n∈N and (‖|DT (n) ω | −1 ‖ ∞ ) n∈N , are submultiplicative. Log-integrability ofC e andC b is assured by Definition 3.3 since we haveC b (T ω ),C e (T ω )≤logb ω . Hence the existence of the limits follows from the Kingman subadditive ergodic theorem \[33\]. Thatχ <1 follows from condition R4. The last statement follows from|DT (n) ω (x)| −1 ≤μ ω,n (x) −d . Lemma 3.16(Quasi-compactness: Lasota-Yorke case).Let0< α <1and let Tbe aC 1+α random Lasota-Yorke dynamical system satisfying the additional condition that the functionω7→log + var(|DT ω | −1 )isP-integrable. Then there exist parametersp >1,0< t <min(α, 1 p )such that the associated random linear system,R, is quasi-compact with κ ∗ ≤ ( 1− 1 p ) (logC ∗ e + logχ) +tlogχ < λ ∗ = 0. Proof of Lemma 3.16.Since we are in the Lasota-Yorke case, strong measur- ability ofω7→ L ω follows from Lemma 3.11. We also haveC ∗ b = 1. By Lemma 3.15,C ∗ e <∞. By hypothesis,χ <1. Fix 0< t < α. Now ifpis sufficiently close to 1,tsatisfiest <min(α,1/p) and the inequality ( 1− 1 p ) (logC ∗ e + logχ) +tlogχ <0 holds. By Lemma C.5, we seeκ ∗ <0. On the other hand we have‖L (n) ω 1‖ H t p ≥C # ‖L (n) ω 1‖ p ≥C # ‖L (n) ω 1‖ 1 =C # so that λ ∗ ≥0. Accordingly Theorem 2.10 applies. Suppose for a contradiction that λ ∗ >0. Now the following are full measure sets: the set where the results of Theorem 2.10 hold; the set where the top Lyapunov exponent isλ ∗ ; the set where the results of Lemma C.5 hold using‖·‖=‖·‖ 1 and|||·|||=‖·‖ BV (by Buzzi’s argument \[7\]); and the set where the results of Lemma C.5 hold using‖·‖=‖·‖ p and|||·|||=‖·‖ H t p , because of Lemmas 3.13 and 3.14. Let the full measure set obtained by intersecting these be denoted by Ω 1 . Supposeω∈Ω 1 and letfbe a non-zero element ofY 1 (ω). By standard properties ofH t p ,fmay be approximated arbitrary closely in‖ · ‖ H t p be a C ∞ functiong. Applying Lemma C.5 with‖ · ‖ 1 and‖ · ‖ BV , (note that ‖L (n) ω g‖ 1 ≤ ‖g‖ 1 for alln), we get lim sup n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω g‖ BV ≤0 and hence lim sup n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω g‖ p ≤0. Applying Lemma C.5 a second time using the conclusion of the first application as hypothesis, we get lim sup n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω g‖ H t p ≤ 0. Lettingπ 1 be the projection onto the top Lyapunov subspace, we have that lim sup n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω (g−π 1 (g))‖ H t p < λ ∗ . Thus lim sup n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω π 1 (g)‖ H t p < 30 λ ∗ . By Theorem 2.10, this impliesπ 1 (g) is 0. Sincegcan be chosen arbitrarily close tofandπ 1 is bounded, this is a contradiction. We now show that results of Cowieson \[9\] may be exploited to give families of random dynamical systems in higher dimensions for which one can establish an Oseledets splitting for the Perron-Frobenius cocycle. The framework of \[9\] has a key simplifying feature, namely that there is afixedpartitionPof the domainX 0 into disjoint open pieces on each of which the map is continuous and expanding. For this reason, the analogue of Lemma 3.12 is straightforward: there is no issue with accounting for differences between partitions. On the other hand a new difficulty appears in higher dimensions, namely that it is no longer truea priorithat the complexity at the beginning,C b (T (n) ω ), is bounded inn. The necessity of controllingC b is demonstrated by results of Tsujii \[46\] and Buzzi \[8\] and indeedC b appears in Baladi and Gou ̈ezel \[2\]. Theorem 3.17(Cowieson\[9\]).LetPbe a fixed branch partition of a compact regionX 0 ⊂R d . There is a quantityMand a denseG δ subset, Cow(X 0 ;P), of PE 2 (X 0 ;P)with the following property: For anyn >0andT∈Cow(X 0 ;P), there is a neighbourhoodUofTsuch that for anyT 1 ,T 2 ,...,T n ∈U,C b (T n ◦ ···◦T 1 )≤M. Lemma 3.18(Quasi-compactness: Cowieson case).Letd >1, letX 0 be a compact region ofR d and letPbe a branch partition ofX 0 . LetT∈Cow(X 0 ;P). Then there exist parametersp >1,0< t <1/p, a constantτ <0and a neighbourhoodNofTwith the following property: LetTbe a randomC 2 piecewise expanding dynamical system with ergodic base. Suppose that forP-almost everyω,T ω has branch partitionPand that T ω ∈N. Then ifL ω is the corresponding family of transfer operators acting on H t p (X 0 ), thenR, the random linear system associated toT, is quasi-compact with κ ∗ ≤τ < λ ∗ = 0. Proof.Lett= 1 2 , letT∈Cow(X 0 ;P), and letkbe the number of elements of P. Leta <1 be such thatμ −1 T < a, whereμ T = essinf x∈X 0 ,‖v‖=1 ‖DT(x)v‖, and letMbe as in guaranteed by Theorem 3.17. Letp >1 be such that k 1− 1 p a d(1− 1 p )+t <1. We may further assume thatp < d/(d−1). This fixes all the data necessary to determineC R . Letn 0 be such thatβ:=C R n 0 M 1/p k n 0 (1− 1 p ) a n 0 (d(1− 1 p )+t) <1 and letτ= logβ/n 0 so thatτ <0. We now apply Theorem 3.17 to deduce that there is a neighbourhoodNofTsuch that for all anyn 0 -fold composition of elements of N, each respecting the branch partitionP, the complexity at the beginning is bounded above byM. We further reduceN(to a smaller open neighbourhood ofT) by requiring thatμ −1 S < afor allS∈N. Now ifTis a randomC 2 piecewise expanding dynamical system where the maps all belong toNthen we have ensured that the quantityB R,n 0 appearing in Lemma 3.13 is at moste n 0 τ . As in the proof of Lemma 3.16 we obtainκ ∗ ≤τ. 31 To see thatλ ∗ = 0, we argue as in Lemma 3.16. We initially apply Lemma C.5 with‖ · ‖=‖ · ‖ L 1 and||| · |||=‖ · ‖ BV to deduce forf∈C ∞ (using results from Cowieson’s paper \[9\]) that lim sup n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω f‖ BV ≤0. Then, since there are constantsC # ,C # (X 0 ) such that for any functiongsupported onX 0 ,‖g‖ L d/(d−1) ≤C # ‖g‖ BV (see Giusti \[22, Theorem 1.28\]) and‖g‖ L p ≤ C # (X 0 )‖g‖ L d/(d−1) , we obtain sufficient conditions for the second application of Lemma C.5, taking this time‖·‖=‖·‖ L p and|||·|||=‖·‖ H t p . The remainder of the proof is exactly as in Lemma 3.16. In view of the quasi-compactness just obtained, we can apply Theorem 2.10 to get our main application theorem, ensuring the existence of an Oseledets splitting for random Lasota-Yorke dynamical systems or Cowieson-type random piecewise expanding dynamical systems. Theorem 3.19.LetR= (Ω,F,P,σ,T)be a randomC 1+α piecewise expand- ing dynamical system satisfying the hypotheses of Lemma 3.16 or Lemma 3.18 with parameterspandt. Then, there exist1≤l≤ ∞, and exceptional Lya- punov exponents0 =λ 1 > λ 2 >···> λ l > κ ∗ ( in the casel=∞, we havelimλ n =κ ∗ ), measurable families of finite-dimensional equivariant spaces Y 1 (ω),...,Y l (ω)⊂Xand a measurable equivariant family of closed subspaces V(ω)⊂Xdefined on a fullPmeasure,σ-invariant subset ofΩso thatX= V(ω)⊕ ⊕ l j=1 Y j (ω), for everyf∈V(ω)\\{0},lim n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω f‖ H t p ≤κ ∗ , and for everyf∈Y j (ω)\\{0},lim n→∞ 1 n log‖L (n) ω f‖ H t p =λ j . Furthermore, the norms of the associated projections are tempered with respect toσ. Remark 3.20.We remark that in both the scenarios that we consider, the existing proofs of Buzzi \[7\] and Cowieson \[9\] establish the existence of random absolutely continuous invariant measures. One can check, using techniques such as those in \[7, Proposition 3.2\] that their densities lie in the leading Oseledets subspace,Y 1 (ω). 4 Future work Several interesting questions remain open for future research. In relation to previous works concerned with exponential decay of correlations, it is natural to look for conditions that provide further information about the structure of the Oseledets splitting, either in a general framework, or in the specific situation of random composition of piecewise expanding maps. Of particular interest would be to ensure simplicity of the leading Lyapunov exponent, and to obtain bounds on the number of exceptional Lyapunov exponents, including finiteness. Some progress has already been achieved in this direction in the settings of smooth expanding maps (see work of Baladi, Kondah and Schmitt \[4\]) subshifts of finite type (see work of Kifer \[31, 32\]) and piecewise smooth expanding maps of the interval (see work of Buzzi \[6\]). In a different direction, it would be interesting to investigate applications of the abstract semi-invertible Oseledets theorem (Theorem 2.10) to a more 32 general class of expanding maps, allowing for non-constant branch partitions and, more ambitiously, to piecewise hyperbolic maps. Finally, we hope that the constructive approach to the identification of Os- eledets spaces turns out to be useful for numerical studies of non-autonomous dynamical systems. A possible alternative would be to first attempt to identify the Oseledets filtration, perhaps using some existing numerical method. Then, one could inductively approximate Oseledets spaces by (1) fixing a sufficiently dense subset of a basis of a suitable Banach space, (2) pushing forward these elements under a numerical approximation of the transfer operator and (3) sub- tracting the projection along the corresponding level in the filtration to lower Oseledets spaces, previously obtained by this procedure. A Strong measurability in separable Banach spaces LetXbe a separable Banach space and letB X be the standard Borelσ-algebra generated by the open subsets ofX. Fix a countable dense sequencex 1 ,x 2 ,... inXfor the remainder of this appendix. It is well known that any open subset of Xis a countable union of sets of the formU i,j , whereU i,j :={x∈X:‖x−x i ‖< 1/j}. Hence,B X is countably generated. We denote byL(X) the set of bounded linear operators fromXtoX. The strong operator topology, SOT(X), onL(X) is the topology generated by the sub-base{V x,y, ={T:‖T(x)−y‖< }}. Definition A.1.Thestrongσ-algebraonL(X)is theσ-algebraSgenerated by sets of the formW x,U ={T:T(x)∈U}, withx∈XandU⊂Xopen. Forr∈R, letL r (X) denote the linear maps fromXto itself with norm at mostr. That is,L r ={T∈L(X) :‖T‖≤r}. Lemma A.2. 1. For everyr∈R,L r ∈S. 2.Sis countably generated. 3. An open set in the strong operator topology lies inS. 4. The strongσ-algebra is the Borelσ-algebra of the strong operator topology SOT(X). 5. An open set inL n (X)(in the relative topology) is the union of countably many sets of the formB i,j,m,n (with terminology introduced in the proof ). Proof.We first show thatL r ∈S. Let ̃ L r = ⋂ j {T:‖T(x j )‖≤r‖x j ‖} = ⋂ j ⋂ k {T:‖T(x j )‖<(r+ 1/k)‖x j ‖}. 33 Then, ̃ L r is a countable intersection of sets in the sub-base and therefore ̃ L r ∈S. We claim thatL r = ̃ L r . Notice that if‖T‖ ≤r, thenT∈ ̃ L r . Conversely let T∈ ̃ L r andx∈X, letx j →x. SinceTis bounded we haveT(x j )→T(x). Since‖T(x j )‖≤r‖x j ‖and‖x j ‖→‖x‖we see that‖T(x)‖≤r‖x‖. Since this holds for allx, we see that‖T‖≤r. Thus,L r = ̃ L r , as claimed. SetV i,j,m ={T:‖T(x i )−x j ‖<1/m}. This clearly belongs toS. We claim that an open setU⊂L(X) in the strong operator topology is the union of sets of the formB i,j,m,n =V i,j,m ∩L n . LetUbe open and letT∈U. ThenUcontains a basic open neighbourhood ofT, that is, a set of the form{S:‖S(y i )−T(y i )‖<  i fori= 1,...,s}(wherey 1 ,...,y s are elements ofX). Letn >‖T‖and let m >max(3/ i ). Choosex k i such that‖x k i −y i ‖<min(1/(2mn), i /(3n)) and x \` i such that‖x \` i −T(y i )‖<min( i /3,1/(2m)). LetC= ⋂ s i=1 B k i ,\` i ,m,n . By an application of the triangle inequality ifS∈C, then we have ‖S(y i )−T(y i )‖≤‖S(y i )−S(x k i )‖+‖S(x k i )−x \` i ‖+‖x \` i −T(y i )‖ ≤n‖y i −x k i ‖+ 1/m+ i /3<  i , so that we seeC⊆U. We also have ‖T(x k i )−x \` i ‖≤‖T(x k i )−T(y i )‖+‖T(y i )−x \` i ‖ ≤‖T‖‖x k i −y i ‖+ 1/(2m)≤1/m, so thatT∈C. It follows that any open setUmay be expressed as a countable union of finite intersections ofS-measurable sets of the formB i,j,m,n , so that open sets belong toS, proving (3). (5) is proved similarly. SinceSis generated by sets that are open in the strong operator topology, it follows thatSis also generated by the (B i,j,m,n ), proving (2). We have shown thatScontains all open sets in the strong operator topology. By definition it is generated by a collection of sets that are open in the strong operator topology. It follows thatSis the Borelσ-algebra of SOT(X). Definition A.3.A mapT: Ω→L(X)is calledstrongly measurableif for everyx∈X, the mapT(·)(x) : Ω→Xgiven byω7→T(ω)(x)is(F,B X ) measurable. Lemma A.4.T: Ω→L(X)is strongly measurable if and only if it is(F,S)- measurable. Proof.Recall that sinceXis separable, bothB X andSare countably generated Borelσ-algebras.B X is generated byU i,j :={x∈X:‖x−x i ‖<1/j}(where {x i } i∈N is a dense set inX) and in view of Lemma A.2,Sis generated by the sets B i,j,m,n =V i,j,m ∩L n (whereV i,j,m ={T:‖T(x i )−x j ‖<1/m}). Furthermore, it is straightforward to check that T −1 (V x,y, ) ={ω:|T(ω)(x)−y|< }=T(·)(x) −1 (B  (y)),(8) whereV x,y, ={T:‖T(x)−y‖< }. 34 Assume thatT: Ω→L(X) is strongly measurable. To show it is (F,S) measurable, it suffices to show thatT −1 (B i,j,m,n )∈F. This follows from (8) and the fact thatL n = ⋂ j ⋂ k {T:‖T(x j )‖<(n+ 1/k)‖x j ‖}, which was established in the proof of Lemma A.2(1). For the converse, suppose thatT: Ω→L(X) is (F,S) measurable. To show it is strongly measurable, we have to show that for everyx∈Xandi,j∈N, T(·)(x) −1 (U i,j )∈ F. Equation (8) gives thatT(·)(x) −1 (U i,j ) =T −1 (V x,x i ,1/j ). SinceV x,x i ,1/j ∈Sby Lemma A.2(3), the result follows. Lemma A.5.The composition of strongly measurable maps is strongly mea- surable. Proof.In view of Lemma A.4, it suffices to show that the composition map Ψ :L(X)×L(X)→L(X) given by Ψ(T,S) =T◦Sis (S ⊗S,S) measurable. We claim that for everyn∈N, the restriction of Ψ toL n (X)×L(X) is con- tinuous with respect to (τ n (X),SOT(X)), whereτ n (X) is the product topology onL n (X)×L(X), and whereL n (X) is endowed with the subspace topology of SOT(X). SinceL(X) is ⋃ n∈N L n (X), the result then follows from Lemma A.2. By Lemma A.2(2), the claim will follow from showing that for everyx,y,, the set Ψ −1 (V x,y, )∩(L n (X)×L(X)) lies inτ n (X). Let (T 0 ,S 0 )∈Ψ −1 (V x,y, )∩ (L n (X)×L(X)). Then,‖T 0 ◦S 0 (x)−y‖< . Letδ < −‖T 0 ◦S 0 (x)−y‖. Then, for (T,S)∈ ( V S 0 (x),T 0 ◦S 0 (x), δ 2 ∩L n (X) ) ×V x,S 0 (x), δ 2n , we have ‖T◦S(x)−y‖≤‖T◦S(x)−T◦S 0 (x)‖+‖T◦S 0 (x)−T 0 ◦S 0 (x)‖+‖T 0 ◦S 0 (x)−y‖ < n δ 2n + δ 2 +‖T 0 ◦S 0 (x)−y‖< . Thus, Ψ(T,S)∈V x,y, and Ψ −1 (V x,y, ) is open inτ n (X), as claimed. Let Φ :L(X)×X→Xbe given by (T,x)7→T(x). Lemma A.6. 1. The restriction ofΦtoL n (X)×Xis continuous, whereL n (X)is endowed with the subspace topology ofSOT(X). 2.ΦisS×B X -measurable. 3. Ifτ: Ω→L(X), given byω7→T ω , is strongly measurable andf: Ω→X, given byω7→x ω , is measurable, thenω7→T ω (x ω )is measurable. Proof.LetUbe an open subset ofXand letA= Φ −1 U∩(L n (X)×X). Let (T,x)∈A, so thatT(x)∈UandT∈L n (X). SinceUis open there exists an  >0 such thatB  (T(x))⊂U. Now letN={S∈L n (X) :‖S(x)−T(x)‖≤/2}. If (S,y)∈N×B /(2n) (x) then we see ‖Φ(S,y)−Φ(T,x)‖=‖S(y)−T(x)‖≤‖S(y)−S(x)‖+‖S(x)−T(x)‖ ≤n‖y−x‖+/2< . 35 It follows thatN×B /(2n) (x) is a subset ofAso thatAis open in the relative topology onL n (X)×X, hence proving (1). IfUis open, then Φ −1 (U) = ⋃ n Φ −1 (U)∩(L n (X)×X). By the above, the set Φ −1 (U)∩(L n (X)×X) is open in the relative topology onL n (X)×X. Since L n (X)×Xhas a countable neighbourhood basis with respect to the relative topology (see Corollary 5), Φ −1 (U) may be expressed as the countable union of products ofS-measurable sets withB X measurable sets. Therefore it isS×B X - measurable, proving (2). Letτ: Ω7→L(X) be strongly measurable andf:ω7→x ω be measurable. Letθ(ω) = (T ω ,x ω ). Then the mapω7→T ω (x ω ) may be factorized as Φ◦θ. It is therefore sufficient to show thatθ −1 Φ −1 Uis measurable for any open setUin X. We showed above that Φ −1 UisS×B X -measurable so it suffices to show that θis measurable. By definition,S ×B X is generated by sets of the formA×B withA∈ SandB∈ B X . The preimage ofA×Bunderθisτ −1 (A)∩f −1 B which is, by assumption, the intersection of two measurable sets. HenceS×B X is generated by a collection of sets whose preimages underθare measurable and henceθis measurable. B The Grassmannian of a Banach space This appendix collects some results about Grassmannians that we need in Sec- tion 2. LetXbe a Banach space. A closed subspaceYofXis calledcomplemented if there exists a closed subspaceZsuch thatXis the topological direct sum of YandZ, writtenX=Y⊕Z. That is, for everyx∈X, there existy∈Yand z∈Zsuch thatx=y+z, and this decomposition is unique. The Grassmannian G(X) is the set of closed complemented subspaces ofX. We denote byG k (X) the collection of closedk-codimensional subspaces ofX(these are automatically complemented). We denote byG k (X) the collection ofk-dimensional subspaces ofX(these are automatically closed and complemented). We equipG(X) with the metricd(Y,Y ′ ) =d H (Y∩B,Y ′ ∩B) whered H denotes the Hausdorff distance andBdenotes the closed unit ball inX. We letB ∗ denote the closed unit ball inX ∗ . We denote byB G the Borelσ-algebra coming fromd. There is a natural map⊥fromG(X) toG(X ∗ ), namelyY ⊥ ={θ∈X ∗ :θ(y) = 0 for ally∈Y}. We use the same notation for the map fromG(X ∗ ) toG(X) given byW ⊥ ={y∈Y:θ(y) = 0 for allθ∈W}. Notice that ifXis a reflexive Banach space, then the two notions of⊥onX ∗ agree. It is well known that for a closed subspaceYofX,Y ⊥⊥ =Y(thatY⊆Y ⊥⊥ follows from the definitions; thatY ⊥⊥ ⊆Yfollows from the Hahn-Banach theorem). The following result may be found in Kato \[27, IV§2\]. Lemma B.1.The maps⊥fromG(X)toG(X ∗ )and fromG(X)toG(X ∗ )are homeomorphisms. 36 Definition B.2.IfY∈G k (X), we will say a basis{y 1 ,...,y k }forYis anice basisif‖y i ‖= 1andd(y i ,span(y 1 ,...,y i−1 ) = 1for eachi. A subset of sizek will be called-niceif1− <‖y i ‖<1 +andd((y i ,span(y 1 ,...,y i−1 ))>1− for eachi >1. Clearly if <1an-nice set is linearly independent. If a set is -nice and a basis, we call it an-nice basis. Lemma B.3.Each element ofG k (X)has a nice basis. Proof.LetY∈ G k (X). We make the inductive claim that for eachm≤k we can find a sequence of elementsy 1 ,...,y m of norm 1 satisfying the claim for 1≤i≤m. The base case is easy: lety 1 be any vector inYof length 1. Suppose we have vectorsy 1 ,...,y m satisfying the claim wherem < k. LetW be the subspace ofYspanned byy 1 ,...,y m . Letx∈Y\\W(such anxexists becauseWis anm-dimensional subspace ofYand hence a proper subspace of Y). By compactness there is aw∈Wminimizing‖x−w‖. Then lety m+1 be a normalized version ofx−w. This completes the inductive step and hence the proof. Lemma B.4.Let{y 1 ,...,y k }be-nice (with <2 −k−2 ). If‖ ∑ a i y i ‖ ≤1 then|a i |≤2 k+1−i for eachi. Proof.Suppose for a contradiction thaty= ∑ a i y i satisfies‖y‖= 1 and|a i |> 2 k+1−i for somei. Letibe the largest such index. Setz= ∑ j≤i a j y j . Then ‖z−y‖ ≤ ∑ j>i |a j |(1 +)≤(2 k+1−i −2)(1 +). On the other hand by the defining property ofy i we have‖z‖ ≥ |a i |(1−) 2 >2 k+1−i (1−2). The triangle inequality then shows that‖y‖>2−2 k+3−i  >1, which contradicts the assumption. Lemma B.5.Lety 1 ,...,y k be an-nice basis for ak-dimensional spaceY (with <2 −k−2 ), then ifWis a space such thatd(y i ,W)< δ/2 k+2 , then sup y∈Y∩B d(y,W∩B)< δ. Proof.Letd(y i ,w i )< δ/2 k+2 . Giveny∈Y∩B,ymay be expressed as ∑ a i y i with|a i | ≤2 k+1−i , by Lemma B.4. Letw= ∑ a i w i . Then‖y−w‖ ≤ ∑ 2 k+1−i δ/2 k+2 < δ/2. It follows that‖w‖<1 +δ/2 so lettingw ′ =wif ‖w‖≤1 andw/‖w‖otherwise, we have‖w ′ −w‖< δ/2. Sincew ′ ∈W∩Bwe deduced(y,W∩B)< δso that sup y∈Y∩B d(y,W∩B)< δas required. For <2 −k−2 , letNB  k (X)⊂X k be the set ofk−dimensional−nice subsets ofX. Corollary B.6.If <2 −k−2 , then the function fromNB  k (X)toG k (X)given by(y 1 ,...,y k )7→span(y 1 ,...,y k )is continuous. Proof.By Lemma B.5, if (y 1 ,...,y k ),(y ′ 1 ,...,y ′ k )∈NB  k (X) are such that ‖y i −y ′ i ‖<2 −(k+2) δ, thend(Y,Y ′ )< δ, whereY= span(y 1 ,...,y k ) andY ′ = span(y ′ 1 ,...,y ′ k ). 37 Lemma B.7.(Symmetry of closeness inG k (X)andG k (X)). LetYandWbe elements ofG k (X). Suppose thatmax y∈Y∩B d(y,W∩B) =r <3 −k /4. Then one obtainsmax w∈W∩B d(w,Y∩B)<4·3 k rand henced(W,Y)<4·3 k r. LetYandWbe elements ofG k (X). Suppose thatmax y∈Y∩B d(y,W∩B) = r <3 −k /8. Then,d(W,Y)<8·3 k r. Proof.Using Lemma B.3, lety 1 ,...,y k be a nice basis forY. By assumption there exist elementsw 1 ,...,w k ofW∩Bsuch that‖w i −y i ‖< r. We first give a lower bound for‖ ∑ k i=1 a i w i ‖. LetM= max i 3 i |a i |and assume thatM= 3 j |a j |. Then we have ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ k ∑ i=1 a i w i ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ≥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ j ∑ i=1 a i w i ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ − ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ k ∑ i=j+1 a i w i ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ≥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ j ∑ i=1 a i y i ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ − ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ j ∑ i=1 a i (w i −y i ) ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ − k ∑ i=j+1 3 −i M ≥|a j |−r j ∑ i=1 |a i |−3 −j M/2 ≥M(3 −j /2−r/2)≥(3 −k /4)M, where for the first term of the third inequality we used the definition of nice basis. In particular if ∑ a i w i ∈B, we have|M|≤4·3 k so that|a i |≤4·3 k−i . Now givenw∈W∩B, writew= ∑ a i w i and lety= ∑ a i y i . Then‖w−y‖≤ ∑ |a i |‖w i −y i ‖≤2·3 k r. Rescalingyto move it insideBif necessary we obtain a pointy ′ ∈Y∩Bwith‖w−y ′ ‖≤4·3 k r. It follows that max w∈W∩B d(w,Y∩B)≤ 4·3 k ras required. A similar argument using the proof of Lemma B.1 gives the result inG k . Lemma B.8.If <2 −k−2 , the setNB  k (X)⊂X k is open. Proof.Let (y 1 ,...,y k )∈NB  k (X). Let ′ < be such that for every 1≤j≤k, 1− ′ ≤‖y j ‖≤1 + ′ andd(y j ,span(y 1 ,...,y j−1 )≥1− ′ . Letr >0 and (w 1 ,...,w k )∈Π k i=1 B r (y i ). Then, for every 1≤j≤kwe have 1− ′ −r≤‖w j ‖≤1 + ′ +rand, ifr >0 is sufficiently small, Lemmas B.5 and B.7 imply thatd(span(y 1 ,...,y j ),span(w 1 ,...,w j ))≤2 j+4 3 j r. It follows from the triangle inequality that d(w j ,span(w 1 ,...,w j−1 ))≥d(y j ,span(y 1 ,...,y j−1 ))−‖y j −w j ‖ −2‖w j ‖d(span(y 1 ,...,y j ),span(w 1 ,...,w j )). Hence,d(w j ,span(w 1 ,...,w j−1 ))≥1− ′ −r−(1 + ′ +r)2 j+5 3 j r. Thus, choosingrsufficiently small, the above yields that (w 1 ,...,w k ) satisfies all the conditions of an-nice basis. Lemma B.9.(Disconnectedness ofG(X)). IfY∈G j (X)and dim(Y ′ )> jthen d(Y,Y ′ )≥2 −j /8. IfY∈G j (X)and codim(Y ′ )> jthend(Y,Y ′ )≥2 −j /16. 38 Proof.We have d(Y,Y ′ ) = max( max y∈Y∩B d(y,Y ′ ∩B),max y ′ ∈Y ′ ∩B d(y ′ ,Y∩B)). Suppose that the first term is less than 2 −j /8. Lety 1 ,...,y j be a nice basis forY(as provided by Lemma B.3). Let‖w i −y i ‖<2 −j /8 and letWbe the space spanned by thew i . Lemma B.5 guarantees that sup y∈Y∩B d(y,W∩B)< 1/2. SinceWis at mostj-dimensional whereas dim(Y ′ )> j, letz∈Y ′ ∩B satisfyd(z,W) = 1. Now fory∈Y∩B,d(z,W)≤d(z,y) +d(y,W), so usingd(y,W)≤1/2 we see thatd(z,y)≥1/2. We have therefore shown that max y ′ ∈Y ′ ∩B d(y ′ ,Y)≥1/2 under the assumption that the first term ofd(Y,Y ′ ) is small. In either case we see thatd(Y,Y ′ ) is bounded below by 2 −j /8. The second statement follows from Lemma B.1. Corollary B.10.Suppose thatY∈G k (X),Y ′ ∈G k ′ (X)andsup y∈Y∩B d(y,Y ′ ∩ B)< . Then, ifis sufficiently small, we have thatk ′ ≥k. Similarly, suppose thatY∈ G k (X),Y ′ ∈ G k ′ (X)andsup y∈Y∩B d(y,Y ′ ∩B)< . Then, ifis sufficiently small, we have thatk ′ ≤k. Proof.We present the proof of the second statement, which is the one used. The proof of the first one is entirely analogous. Let <3 −k /8, and assume the hypotheses hold. We want to show that k ′ ≤k. Assume on the contrary thatk ′ > k, and pick ̃ Y⊂Ysuch that ̃ Y∈ G k ′ (X). Then, sup y∈ ̃ Y∩B d(y,Y ′ ∩B)≤sup y∈Y∩B d(y,Y ′ ∩B)< . In view of Lemma B.7,d( ̃ Y ,Y ′ )<3 k ′ 8, so sup y ′ ∈Y ′ ∩B d(y ′ ,Y∩B)≤sup y ′ ∈Y ′ ∩B d(y ′ , ̃ Y∩ B)<3 k ′ 8. Sod(Y,Y ′ )<3 k ′ 8. Ifis sufficiently small, this contradicts Lemma B.9. Thus,k ′ ≤k. Lemma B.11.IfXis separable, thenG k (X)is separable. Proof.Letx 1 ,x 2 ,...be a dense sequence inB. Then the collection of linearly independentk-element subsets of{x 1 ,x 2 ,...}is also countable. LetY∈G k (X). Lety 1 ,...,y k be a nice basis forY(as in Lemma B.3). Then given >0, let (x i j ) k j=1 ∈Bbe chosen so that‖x i j −y j ‖≤/2 k+2 . LetW= span(x i 1 ,...,x i k ). Lemma B.5 implies that max y∈Y∩B d(y,W)< . Then Lemma B.7 implies that d(Y,W)≤4·3 k , so the separability is established. Lemma B.12.IfX ∗ is separable, thenG k (X)is separable. Proof.Lemma B.1 implies thatG k (X) is homeomorphic toG k (X ∗ ). The result follows from Lemma B.11. Lemma B.13.LetΦ :L(X)×G(X)→ G(X)be given byΦ(T,W) =T(W). For0≤l≤k, let ̃ G(n,k,l) ={(T,W)∈L n (X)×G k (X) : dim(KerT∩W)≥l}. 39 This is a closed subset ofL n (X)×G k (X), whereL n (X)is endowed with the restriction of the strong operator topology onL(X). Also, let G(n,k,l) = ̃ G(n,k,l)\\ ̃ G(n,k,l+ 1) ={(T,W)∈L n (X)×G k (X) : dim(KerT∩W) =l}. Then,Φ| G(n,k,l) :G(n,k,l)→G k−l (X)is continuous. Proof.To see that ̃ G(n,k,l) is a closed set, suppose thatT∈L n (X),W∈ G k (X) and dim(KerT∩W) =s < l. Let{Tw 1 ,...,Tw k−s }be a nice basis for T(W). LetM= max‖w i ‖. LetU δ ={S∈L n (X) :‖S(w i )−T(w i )‖< δ}(a relatively open subset ofL n (X)), and letV∈G k (X) be such thatd(W,V)< δ. Then in particularVcontains elementsv 1 ,...,v k−s such that‖v i −w i ‖< Mδ. Now we have‖S(v i )−T(w i )‖≤‖S‖‖v i −w i ‖+‖S(w i )−T(w i )‖≤(nM+ 1)δ. By Lemma B.8, if >0 andδis small enough, then{Sv 1 ,...,Sv k−s }is an -nice basis of span(Sv 1 ,...,Sv k−s )⊂S(V). In particular,S(V) has dimension at leastk−s. It follows that dim(KerS∩V)≤s, so ̃ G(n,k,l) c ⊂L n (X)×G k (X) is open. Let (T,W)∈G(n,k,l), and letr >0. Let{Tw 1 ,...,Tw k−l }be a nice basis forT(W), and letMandU δ as in the previous paragraph. We claim that ifδ >0 is sufficiently small and (S,V)∈ ( U δ ×B G (W,δ) ) ∩G(n,k,l), thend(T(W),S(V))< r. Indeed, let >0. The previous argument shows that ifδis sufficiently small and‖v i −w i ‖< Mδfor each 1≤i≤k−l, then {Sv 1 ,...,Sv k−l }is an-nice basis forS(V) such that‖S(v i )−T(w i )‖≤(nM+ 1)δ. Hence, by the proof of Corollary B.6,d(T(W),S(V))<2 k+2 (nM+ 1)δ. Takingδ < r 2 k+2 (nM+1) yields the claim. Corollary B.14.The mapΦ k :L(X)×G k (X)→G ≤k (X)given byΦ k (T,W) = T(W)is(S⊗B G ,B G )-measurable. Proof.Let us note thatL(X)×G k (X) = ⋃ n∈N ⋃ k l=0 G(n,k,l). Also,G(n,k,l) is S⊗B G measurable, asL n (X) isSmeasurable, andG(n,k,l) is the difference of two closed sets inL n (X)×G k (X), by Lemma B.13. Since Φ| G(n,k,l) is continuous again by Lemma B.13, then Φ k is (S⊗B G ,B G )-measurable. Lemma B.15.LetXbe separable,Π :X→Ya surjective bounded linear map, andk≥0. Then, the restriction of the induced mapΠ k :G k (X)→G(Y) toΠ −1 (G j (Y))is continuous for everyj≥0. Furthermore,Π k is measurable. Proof.First, we note that since Π is surjective,Yis separable and for every W∈G k (X), Π k (W)∈G ≤k (Y). For every 0≤j, the setG k (X)∩Π −1 k (G ≤j (Y)) is relatively open inG k (X). To see this, letW∈G k (X)∩Π −1 k (G j (Y)). By the above,j≤k. LetW ′ ∈G k (X) be such thatd(W,W ′ )≤δ. By the open mapping theorem, there existsr >0 such thatrB Π k (W) ⊂Π k (W∩B X ). Letz∈Π k (W)∩B Y . Then, there exist 40 w∈W∩ 1 r B X andw ′ ∈W ′ ∩ 1 r B X such that Πw=zand‖w−w ′ ‖≤ δ r . Hence, ‖Πw−Πw ′ ‖≤ ‖Π‖δ r . Thus, sup z∈Π k (W)∩B Y d(z,Π k (W ′ )∩B Y )≤2sup z∈Π k (W)∩B Y d(z,Π k (W ′ ))< 2‖Π‖δ r . Ifδis sufficiently small, Corollary B.10 implies thatW ′ ∈Π −1 k (G ≤j (X)). It follows from the proof in the previous paragraph and Lemma B.7 that the restriction of Π k to Π −1 k (G j (Y)) is continuous. The fact that Π k :G k (X)→ G(Y) is measurable follows from the previous two paragraphs. Lemma B.16.The functionν:L(X)×G k (X)→Rgiven byν(R,Y) =‖R| Y ‖ is measurable whenL(X)is endowed with the strongσ-algebraS. Proof.By Lemma A.2, it suffices to show continuity ofνas restricted toL n (X)× G k (X), whereL n (X) is endowed with the restriction of the strong operator topology. LetY∈G k (X) and letR∈L n (X). Let >0 and letδ < /(n+k2 k ). Let{y 1 ,...,y k }be a nice basis forY. LetN={S∈L n (X) :‖S(y i )−R(y i )‖< δ}and letW∈G k (X) satisfyd(W,Y)< δ. Now givenw∈B∩W, there exists ay∈B∩Ysuch that‖w−y‖< δ(or conversely giveny∈B∩Y, there exists aw∈B∩Wsuch that‖w−y‖< δ). We then have ‖S(w)‖≤‖R(y)‖+‖S(y)−R(y)‖+‖S(w)−S(y)‖and ‖S(w)‖≥‖R(y)‖−‖S(y)−R(y)‖−‖S(w)−S(y)‖. It follows that|‖S(w)‖−‖R(y)‖|≤‖S(y)−R(y)‖+‖S(w)−S(y)‖. The second term of the right side is bounded above bynδ. For the first term, notice that by Lemma B.4,ymay be expressed as a linear combination ofy i ’s with coefficients bounded above by 2 k . Hence the first term is bounded above byk2 k δ. It follows that|‖S(w)‖−‖R(y)‖|≤(n+k2 k )δ. By takingy∈Y∩Bfor which‖R(y)‖=‖R| Y ‖it follows that‖S| W ‖> ‖R| Y ‖−. Similarly takingw∈W∩Bfor which‖S(w)‖=‖S| W ‖we obtain ‖R| Y ‖>‖S| W ‖−so that|‖R| Y ‖−‖S| W ‖|< as required. A pair of closed complemented subspacesY,ZofXis calledcomplementary ifY∩Z={0}andY⊕Z=X. By the closed graph theorem, any pair of complementary spaces (Y,Z) specifies a bounded linear map Π Y‖Z , which is the projection ontoYalongZ, having kernelZand imageY. By symmetry, the map Π Z‖Y is also a linear and bounded projection. Fork≥0, let Comp k (X) ={(Y,Z)∈G k (X)×G k (X) :Y∩Z={0},Y⊕Z=X}, and let Comp(X) = ⋃ k≥0 Comp k (X) be the set of complementary subspace pairs ofXof finite dimension/codimension. 41 Lemma B.17.Let(Y,Z)∈Comp(X)andY ′ ∈G(X). Then, ‖Π Z‖Y | Y ′ ‖≤2‖Π Z‖Y ‖d(Y,Y ′ ). Proof.Lety ′ ∈Y ′ and >0. Lety∈Ybe such that‖y ′ −y‖ ≤d(y ′ ,Y) +. Then, ‖Π Z‖Y (y ′ )‖=‖Π Z‖Y (y ′ −y)‖≤‖Π Z‖Y ‖(d(y ′ ,Y) +)≤‖Π Z‖Y ‖ ( 2‖y ′ ‖d(Y ′ ,Y) +). Letting→0, the result follows. Lemma B.18.The mapΨ :Comp(X)→L(X)given byΨ(Y,Z) = Π Z‖Y is continuous, where Comp(X)carries the product topology induced by the metric onG(X)andL(X)is endowed with the norm topology. Remark B.19.Since the norm topology is finer than the strong operator topol- ogy onL(X), Lemma B.18 yields thatΨis also continuous whenL(X)is en- dowed with the strong operator topology. Proof of Lemma B.18.Let >0. Let (Y,Z)∈Comp(X) andx∈X. Since dimY <∞, thenY∩∂Bis compact. Hence,ζ:= inf y∈Y∩∂B d(y,Z)>0. Letδ <min{ 1 3 , ζ 8+2ζ }and (Y ′ ,Z ′ )∈Comp(Z) such thatd(Y,Y ′ ),d(Z,Z ′ )< δ. Then, inf y ′ ∈Y ′ ∩∂B d(y ′ ,Z ′ )≥ ζ 2 . Indeed, lety ′ ∈Y ′ ∩∂B, and lety∈Y∩B be such that‖y ′ −y‖< δ. Then, 1−δ <‖y‖<1 +δ. Letz∈Zbe such that ‖y−z‖< d(y,Z) +δ. Then,‖z‖≤2‖y‖+δ <3 and d(y ′ ,Z ′ )≥d(y,Z)−‖y−y ′ ‖−d(z,Z ′ )≥ζ(1−δ)−δ−3δ≥ ζ 2 . We claim that‖Π Y ′ ‖Z ′ ‖< 2 ζ and‖Π Z ′ ‖Y ′ ‖< 2 ζ +1. Indeed, letx∈X∩∂B, and writex=y ′ +z ′ , withy ′ ∈Y ′ andz ′ ∈Z ′ . Then, 1 =‖y ′ +z ′ ‖ ≥d(y ′ ,Z ′ )≥ ζ 2 ‖y ′ ‖, so that‖y ′ ‖ ≤ 2 ζ and the first claim follows. The second claim follows from the triangle inequality. LetM= max{‖Π Y‖Z ‖,‖Π Z‖Y ‖}. Assume also thatδ <  4M ( 2 ζ + 1 ) −1 . Then, if (Y ′ ,Z ′ )∈Comp(Z) is such thatd(Y,Y ′ ),d(Z,Z ′ )< δ, we have that ∣ ∣ ‖Π Z‖Y ‖−‖Π Z ′ ‖Y ′ ‖ ∣ ∣ ≤‖Π Z‖Y −Π Z ′ ‖Y ′ ‖ ≤‖ ( Π Z‖Y −Π Z ′ ‖Y ′ ) | Z ′ ‖‖Π Z ′ ‖Y ′ ‖+‖ ( Π Z‖Y −Π Z ′ ‖Y ′ ) | Y ′ ‖‖Π Y ′ ‖Z ′ ‖ ≤‖Π Y‖Z | Z ′ ‖‖Π Z ′ ‖Y ′ ‖+‖Π Z‖Y | Y ′ ‖‖Π Y ′ ‖Z ′ ‖ ≤2M(d(Z,Z ′ ) +d(Y,Y ′ )) ( 2 ζ + 1 ) < , where the third inequality follows from the fact that Π Y‖Z + Π Z‖Y = Id, and the fourth one follows from Lemma B.17 and the claim above. 42 Lemma B.20.Let NI(X) = ⋃ k,k ′ ≥0 {(Y,Z)∈ ( G k (X)×G k ′ (X) ) ∪ ( G k (X)×G k ′ (X) ) ∪ ( G k (X)×G k ′ (X) ) :Y∩Z={0}} be the set of pairs of subspaces ofXof finite dimension/codimension with trivial intersection. Then, the mapΨ ′ :NI(X)→ G(X)be given byΨ ′ (Y,Z) =Y⊕Zis continuous. Proof.Let (Y,Z)∈NI(X). LetW∈ G(X) be such that (Y⊕Z,W)∈ Comp(X), so thatY⊕Z⊕W=X. Also, letM= max(‖Π Y‖Z⊕W ‖,‖Π Z‖Y⊕W ‖). Letδ >0 andY ′ ,Z ′ ∈ G(X) be such thatd(Y,Y ′ ),d(Z,Z ′ )< δ. Let y∈Y,z∈Zbe such that‖y+z‖ ≤1. Then‖y‖,‖z‖ ≤M. Therefore, there existy ′ ∈Y ′ andz ′ ∈Z ′ such that‖y−y ′ ‖,‖z−z ′ ‖< Mδ. Hence,‖(y+z)−(y ′ + z ′ )‖≤‖y−y ′ ‖+‖z−z ′ ‖≤2Mδ. Therefore, sup x∈(Y⊕Z)∩B d(x,Y ′ ⊕Z ′ )≤2Mδ, and by the triangle inequality, sup x∈(Y⊕Z)∩B d(x,(Y ′ ⊕Z ′ )∩B)≤4Mδ. If δis sufficiently small, Lemma B.9 implies that (co)dimY= (co)dimY ′ and (co)dimZ= (co)dimZ ′ . Hence, using Lemma B.7, we get thatd(Y⊕Z,Y ′ ⊕ Z ′ )< ̃ Mδ, where ̃ Mdepends onM,kandk ′ . Hence, Ψ ′ is continuous. Definition B.21.A Banach spaceXis calleduniformly convexif there is an increasing function(r)>0withlim r→0 (r) = 0such that for everyx,y∈B, ‖ x+y 2 ‖≤1−(‖x−y‖). Given a uniformly convex Banach spaceX, a closed subspaceV⊂X, and a pointx∈X, there is a unique nearest point ofVtox(see e.g. Lax \[34, p.45\]). We call this pointρ V (x). Lemma B.22.LetXbe a uniformly convex Banach space. Then, the function ρ:X×G k (X)→Xgiven byρ(x,V) =ρ V (x)is continuous. Proof.Ifx∈V, then the conclusion is straightforward. Consider the case x6∈V. Observe that for everyλ∈Rwe haveρ(λx,V) =|λ|ρ(x,V). Let {(x n ,V n )} n∈N ⊂X×G k (X) be such that lim n→∞ (x n ,V n ) = (x,V). Lety n =ρ V n (x n ),z n =ρ V (y n ) andy=ρ V (x). As previously, by the trian- gle inequality, we have that‖y n ‖≤2‖x n ‖. Also,‖y n −z n ‖≤2‖y n ‖d(V n ,V)≤ 4‖x n ‖d(V n ,V). Hence, ‖x−z n ‖≤‖x−x n ‖+‖x n −y n ‖+‖y n −z n ‖ ≤‖x−x n ‖+d(x n ,V n ) + 4‖x n ‖d(V n ,V). Since the distance functiond:X×G k (X)→Rgiven byd(x,V) = inf v∈V ‖v− x‖= min v∈V ‖v−x‖is continuous, lim n→∞ ‖x−z n ‖=d(x,V). We claim that 43 {z n } n∈N must be a Cauchy sequence. Indeed, letz ′ n = z n −x ‖z n −x‖ anda m,n = ( 1 2‖z n −x‖ + 1 2‖z m −x‖ ) . Then, ∥ ∥ ∥ z ′ n +z ′ m 2 ∥ ∥ ∥ =a m,n ∥ ∥ ∥ 1 2‖z n −x‖a m,n z n + 1 2‖z m −x‖a m,n z m −x ∥ ∥ ∥ ≥a m,n d(x,V). Sincea m,n d(x,V)→1 asm,n→ ∞andXis uniformly convex, this implies that‖z ′ m −z ′ n ‖ →0. Therefore‖z m −z n ‖ →0, and{z n } n∈N is a Cauchy sequence. Letz= lim n→∞ z n . Then,‖x−z‖=d(x,V), and by uniqueness,z=ρ V (x). Furthermore, ‖ρ V (x)−ρ V n (x n )‖=‖z−y n ‖≤‖z−z n ‖+‖z n −y n ‖ ≤‖z−z n ‖+ 4‖x n ‖d(V n ,V)−→ n→∞ 0, soρis continuous. C Some facts from ergodic theory C.1 A characterization of tempered maps This appendix provides a characterization of tempered maps, based on the fol- lowing theorem. Theorem C.1(Tanny).LetTbe an ergodic measure-preserving transforma- tion of a probability space(X,B,μ). Letf:X→Rbe a non-negative measurable function. Then eitherf(T n x)/n→0forμ-almost everyx; orlim supf(T n x)/n= ∞forμ-almost everyx. The proof of the following lemma is based on a very concise proof of Tanny’s theorem, attributed to Feldman, that appears in a Lyons, Pemantle and Peres \[36\]. Lemma C.2.LetTbe an invertible ergodic measure-preserving transformation of a probability space(X,B,μ). Letf:X→Rbe a non-negative measurable function. Thenf(T −n x)/n→0forμ-almost everyxasn→ ∞if and only if f(T n x)/n→0forμ-almost everyxasn→∞. Proof.Suppose thatf(T −n x)/n→0. Let >0. There exists forμ-almost every xanLsuch thatn≥Limpliesf(T −n x)/n < . Fixing a sufficiently largeL, the setA={x:f(T −n x)/n < for alln≥L}has measure at least 1/2. Now we apply the Birkhoff ergodic theorem to1 A . For almost everyx, there exists ann 0 such that forn≥n 0 one has (1/n)(1 A (x) +...+1 A (T n−1 x))∈\[2/5,3/5\]. Fix such anxand letn 0 be the corresponding quantity. Then letN >max(n 0 ,5L). We then have #{0≤i < N:T i (x)∈A}≤3N/5. 44 On the other hand we have #{0≤i <2N:T i (x)∈A}≥4N/5. It follows that there existsi∈\[N+L,2N) withT i (x)∈A. The fact thatT i (x)∈ Atells us thatf(T N x)< (i−N)< N. It follows thatf(T N x)/N < . Since this holds for all largeNandwas arbitrary we deduce thatf(T n x)/n→0. The converse statement follows immediately. Combining the proof of Lemma C.2 with Tanny’s theorem, we get the fol- lowing. Theorem C.3.LetTbe an invertible ergodic measure-preserving transforma- tion of a probability space(X,B,μ). Letf:X→Rbe a non-negative measurable function. Then one of the following holds: •f(T n x)/n→0forμ-almost everyxasn→±∞; or •lim sup n→∞ f(T n x)/n=∞andlim sup n→∞ f(T −n x)/n=∞forμ- almost everyx. Proof.In view of Tanny’s theorem, it is sufficient to show that iff(T −n x)/n→0 a.e. thenf(T n x)/n→0 a.e. This follows from Lemma C.2. C.2 Random version of Hennion’s theorem In this appendix, we present a result that allows us to bound the index of com- pactness and maximal Lyapunov exponent of some random dynamical systems satisfying certain Lasota-Yorke type inequalities. We remark that many parts of this lemma essentially appear in Buzzi \[7\]. We have modified the conclusion and weakened the hypotheses in one place. This result is based on the following theorem of Hennion \[24\]. Theorem C.4(Hennion).Let(X,‖·‖)be a Banach space and suppose that Yis a closed subspace ofX. LetYbe equipped with a finer norm|||.|||(such that‖y‖ ≤ |||y|||for ally∈Y) such that the inclusion of(Y,|||·|||)↪→(Y,‖·‖) is compact. Suppose thatLis a linear operator such thatL(X)⊂Xand L(Y)⊂Y. Suppose further that for ally∈Y, one has the inequality |||L(y)|||≤A‖y‖+B|||y|||. Then the index of compactness ofLis bounded above by2B. Lemma C.5.Let(X,‖·‖)be a Banach space and letYbe a closed subspace. Let|||·|||be a finer norm onYsuch that the inclusion of(Y,|||·|||)↪→(Y,‖·‖) is compact. Letσ: (Ω,μ)→(Ω,μ)be an invertible ergodic measure preserving dynamical system and let(L ω ) ω∈Ω be a family of linear maps, each mappingX toXandYtoYcontinuously. As usual, letL (n) ω =L σ n−1 ω ◦...◦L ω . 45 Suppose we have the following inequalities: (Strong L-Y)|||L ω f|||≤A(ω)‖f‖+B(ω)|||f|||for allf∈Y; (Weak L-Y)|||L ω |||≤C(ω), whereA(ω),B(ω)andC(ω)are measurable functions,C(ω)is log-integrable and ∫ logB(ω)dμ(ω)<0. Then there exists a full measure subsetΩ 1 ⊂Ωwith the following properties: 1.lim n→∞ (1/n) log|||L (n) ω ||| ic ≤ ∫ logB(ω)dμ(ω)for allω∈Ω 1 ; 2. Forω∈Ω 1 , suppose thatf∈Ysatisfies lim sup n→∞ (1/n) log‖L (n) ω f‖≤0.(9) Thenlim sup n→∞ (1/n) log|||L (n) ω f|||≤0. Proof.For the first statement, notice that applying the strong Lasota-Yorke inequality we obtain inductively|||L (n) ω f||| ≤B(σ n−1 )...B(ω)|||f|||+D‖f‖for a constantDdepending onωandn. From Hennion’s theorem, we deduce |||L (n) ω ||| ic ≤2B(σ n−1 ω)...B(ω). Taking logarithms, the conclusion then follows from the ergodic theorem. We now show the second statement. There exists aδ >0 such that for any setSof measure at mostδ, one has ∫ S (logC−logB)dμ <− ∫ logB dμ. Now sinceAis measurable, there exists aK >0 such thatμ({ω:A(ω)≥K})< δ. Set ̃ B(ω) =B(ω) ifA(ω)≤KandC(ω) otherwise. Set ̃ A(ω) = min(A(ω),K). We see that we have a hybrid Lasota-Yorke inequality obtained by applying the strong Lasota-Yorke inequality for cases in whichA(ω)≤Kand the weak in- equality otherwise: |||L ω f|||≤ ̃ A(ω)‖f‖+ ̃ B(ω)|||f|||.(10) The advantage of this is that we still have ∫ log ̃ B dμ <0 and ̃ Ais now uniformly bounded byK. Applying the ergodic theorem (with the transformation beingσ −1 ) we obtain a measurable functionF(ω) such that forP-almost everyω, we have ̃ B(σ −1 ω)... ̃ B(σ −k ω)≤F(ω) for allk≥0.(11) Letβ > ∫ logC. Applying the ergodic theorem once more, we obtain, for P-almost everyω, the bound C(σ n+k−1 ω)...C(σ n ω)≤H(σ n ω)e βk for alln,k≥0.(12) There exists aB >0 such thatH(ω)F(ω)< Bon a set of positive measure. By the ergodic theorem, for allδ >0, for almost everyω, there exists ann 0 such that ∀N > n 0 ,∃n∈\[N(1−δ),N) withH(σ n ω)F(σ n ω)< B.(13) 46 Now let Ω 1 be the set of full measure on which the conditions above hold. Fix anω∈Ω 1 and letf∈Ysatisfy (9). Let >0 be arbitrary. Then by the hypotheses, there exists a constantLsuch that ‖L (n) ω f‖≤Le n/2 for alln≥0.(14) Now by iterating (10), we obtain the bound (valid for allf∈Y) |||L n ω f|||≤ ̃ B(σ n−1 ω)... ̃ A(ω)|||f|||+ ̃ B(σ n−1 ω)... ̃ B(σω) ̃ A(ω)‖f‖+ ...+ ̃ B(σ n−1 ω) ̃ A(σ n−2 ω)‖L (n−2) ω f‖+ ̃ A(σ n−1 ω)‖L (n−1) ω f‖. Using the inequalities ̃ B(σ n−1 ω)... ̃ B(σ n−k ω)≤F(σ n ω) (from (11)), the fact that ̃ A(ω)≤K, and (14), we obtain an upper bound of the form |||L n ω f|||≤MF(σ n ω)e n/2 ,(15) for a suitable constantM. Combining this with (12) we obtain |||L n+k ω f|||≤MF(σ n ω)H(σ n ω)e n/2 e βk (16) We can therefore obtain a bound for|||L m ω f|||by minimizing the above over possible decompositionsm=n+k. Letn 0 be as in (13) whereδis taken to be/(2β) and supposem > n 0 is given. Then there exists ak < /(2β)msuch thatF(σ m−k ω)H(σ m−k ω)≤Bso that |||L m ω f|||≤MBe m/2 e βk < MBe m . It follows that lim sup N→∞ (1/N)|||L (N) ω f|||≤. Sinceis arbitrary, the proof is complete. References \[1\] V. Baladi. Anisotropic Sobolev spaces and dynamical transfer operators: C ∞ foliations. InAlgebraic and topological dynamics, volume 385 ofCon- temp. Math., pages 123–135. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2005. \[2\] V. Baladi and S. Gou ̈ezel. Good Banach spaces for piecewise hyper- bolic maps via interpolation.Ann. Inst. H. Poincar ́e Anal. Non Lin ́eaire, 26(4):1453–1481, 2009. \[3\] V. Baladi, S. Isola, and B. Schmitt. Transfer operator for piecewise affine approximations of interval maps.Ann. Inst. H. Poincar ́e Phys. Th ́eor., 62(3):251–265, 1995. \[4\] V. Baladi, A. Kondah, and B. Schmitt. Random correlations for small perturbations of expanding maps.Random Comput. Dynam., 4(2-3):179– 204, 1996. 47 \[5\] L. Barreira and C. Silva. Lyapunov exponents for continuous transforma- tions and dimension theory.Discrete Contin. Dyn. Syst., 13(2):469–490, 2005. \[6\] J. Buzzi. Exponential decay of correlations for random Lasota-Yorke maps. Comm. Math. Phys., 208(1):25–54, 1999. \[7\] J. Buzzi. Absolutely continuous S.R.B. measures for random Lasota-Yorke maps.Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 352(7):3289–3303, 2000. \[8\] J. Buzzi. No or infinitely many a.c.i.p. for piecewise expandingC r maps in higher dimensions.Commun. Math. Phys., 222:495–501, 2001. \[9\] W. Cowieson. Absolutely continuous invariant measures for most piecewise smooth expanding maps.Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems, 22:1061–1078, 2002. \[10\] M. Dellnitz, G. Froyland, C. Horenkamp, K. Padberg-Gehle, and A. Sen Gupta. Seasonal variability of the subpolar gyres in the southern ocean: a numerical investigation based on transfer operators.Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics, 16(6):655–663, 2009. \[11\] M. Dellnitz, G. Froyland, and S. Sertl. On the isolated spectrum of the Perron-Frobenius operator.Nonlinearity, 13(4):1171–1188, 2000. \[12\] M. Dellnitz and O. Junge. On the approximation of complicated dynamical behavior.SIAM J. Numer. Anal., 36(2):491–515, 1999. \[13\] T. S. Doan.Lyapunov Exponents for Random Dynamical Systems. PhD thesis, Fakult ̈at Mathematik und Naturwissenschaften der Technischen Universit ̈at Dresden, 2009. \[14\] G. Froyland. Approximating physical invariant measures of mixing dynam- ical systems in higher dimensions.Nonlinear Anal., 32(7):831–860, 1998. \[15\] G. Froyland. Ulam’s method for random interval maps.Nonlinearity, 12(4):1029–1052, 1999. \[16\] G. Froyland. On Ulam approximation of the isolated spectrum and eigen- functions of hyperbolic maps.Discrete Contin. Dyn. Syst., 17(3):671–689 (electronic), 2007. \[17\] G. Froyland.Unwrapping eigenfunctions to discover the geometry of almost-invariant sets in hyperbolic maps.Phys. D, 237(6):840–853, 2008. \[18\] G. Froyland, S. Lloyd, and A. Quas. Coherent structures and isolated spectrum for Perron-Frobenius cocycles.Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems, 30(3):729–756, 2010. \[19\] G. Froyland, S. Lloyd, and A. Quas. A semi-invertible Oseledets theorem with applications to transfer operator cocycles. submitted, 2010. 48 \[20\] G. Froyland, S. Lloyd, and N. Santitissadeekorn.Coherent sets for nonautonomous dynamical systems.Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 239(16):1527 – 1541, 2010. \[21\] G. Froyland, K. Padberg, M. England, and A.-M. Treguier. Detection of coherent oceanic structures via transfer operators.Phys. Rev. Lett., 98(22):224503, May 2007. \[22\] E. Giusti.Minimal surfaces and functions of bounded variation. Birkh ̈auser, 1984. \[23\] C. Gonz ́alez-Tokman, B. Hunt, and P. Wright. Approximating invariant densities of metastable systems.Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems, FirstView:1–17, 2010. \[24\] H. Hennion. Sur un th ́eor\`eme spectral et son application aux noyaux lip- chitziens.Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 118(2):627–634, 1993. \[25\] V. Ka ̆ımanovich. Lyapunov exponents, symmetric spaces and a multi- plicative ergodic theorem for semisimple Lie groups.Zap. Nauchn. Sem. Leningrad. Otdel. Mat. Inst. Steklov. (LOMI), 164(Differentsialnaya Geom. Gruppy Li i Mekh. IX):29–46, 196–197, 1987. \[26\] A. Karlsson and F. Ledrappier. On laws of large numbers for random walks. Ann. Probab., 34(5):1693–1706, 2006. \[27\] T. Kato.Perturbation theory for linear operators. Classics in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1995. Reprint of the 1980 edition. \[28\] M. Keane, R. Murray, and L.-S. Young. Computing invariant measures for expanding circle maps.Nonlinearity, 11(1):27–46, 1998. \[29\] G. Keller and C. Liverani. Stability of the spectrum for transfer operators. Ann. Scuola Norm. Sup. Pisa Cl. Sci. (4), 28(1):141–152, 1999. \[30\] G. Keller and H.-H. Rugh. Eigenfunctions for smooth expanding circle maps.Nonlinearity, 17(5):1723–1730, 2004. \[31\] Y. Kifer. Equilibrium states for random expanding transformations.Ran- dom Comput. Dynam., 1(1):1–31, 1992/93. \[32\] Y. Kifer. Thermodynamic formalism for random transformations revisited. Stoch. Dyn., 8(1):77–102, 2008. \[33\] J. Kingman. The ergodic theory of subadditive stochastic processes.J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B, 30:499–510, 1973. \[34\] P. Lax.Functional analysis. Pure and Applied Mathematics (New York). Wiley-Interscience \[John Wiley & Sons\], New York, 2002. 49 \[35\] Z. Lian and K. Lu. Lyapunov exponents and invariant manifolds for ran- dom dynamical systems in a Banach space.Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 206(967):vi+106, 2010. \[36\] R. Lyons, R. Pemantle, and Y. Peres. Conceptual proofs ofLlogLcriteria for mean behavior of branching processes.Ann. Probab., 23(3):1125–1138, 1995. \[37\] R. Ma ̃n ́e. Lyapounov exponents and stable manifolds for compact trans- formations. InGeometric dynamics (Rio de Janeiro, 1981), volume 1007 ofLecture Notes in Math., pages 522–577. Springer, Berlin, 1983. \[38\] V. I. Oseledec. A multiplicative ergodic theorem. Characteristic Ljapunov, exponents of dynamical systems.Trudy Moskov. Mat. Obˇsˇc., 19:179–210, 1968. \[39\] M. Raghunathan. A proof of Oseledec’s multiplicative ergodic theorem. Israel J. Math., 32(4):356–362, 1979. \[40\] D. Ruelle. Ergodic theory of differentiable dynamical systems.Inst. Hautes ́ Etudes Sci. Publ. Math., 50:27–58, 1979. \[41\] W. Sickel. Pointwise multipliers of Lizorkin-Triebel spaces. InThe Maz ′ ya anniversary collection, Vol. 2 (Rostock, 1998), volume 110 ofOper. Theory Adv. Appl., pages 295–321. Birkh ̈auser, Basel, 1999. \[42\] R. Strichartz. Multipliers on fractional Sobolev spaces.J. Math. Mech., 16:1031–1060, 1967. \[43\] P. Thieullen. Fibr ́es dynamiques asymptotiquement compacts. Exposants de Lyapounov. Entropie. Dimension.Ann. Inst. H. Poincar ́e Anal. Non Lin ́eaire, 4(1):49–97, 1987. \[44\] D. Thomine. A spectral gap for transfer operators of piecewise expanding maps.Discrete and Continuous Dynamical Systems (Series A), 30(3):917 – 944, July 2011. \[45\] H. Triebel.Theory of function spaces. II, volume 84 ofMonographs in Mathematics. Birkh ̈auser Verlag, Basel, 1992. \[46\] M. Tsujii. Piecewise expanding maps on the plane with singular ergodic properties.Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems, 20:1851–1857, 2000. 50