Lectures on Lyapunov exponents Marcelo Viana IMPA – Rio de Janeiro v To Tania, Miguel and Anita, for their understanding. Contents Prefacepagexi 1Introduction1 1.1Existence of Lyapunov exponents1 1.2Pinching and twisting2 1.3Continuity of Lyapunov exponents3 1.4Notes3 1.5Exercises4 2Linear cocycles6 2.1Examples7 2.1.1Products of random matrices7 2.1.2Derivative cocycles8 2.1.3Schr ̈odinger cocycles9 2.2Hyperbolic cocycles10 2.2.1Definition and properties10 2.2.2Stability and continuity14 2.2.3Obstructions to hyperbolicity16 2.3Notes18 2.4Exercises19 3Extremal Lyapunov exponents20 3.1Subadditive ergodic theorem20 3.1.1Preparing the proof21 3.1.2Fundamental lemma23 3.1.3Estimating φ − 24 3.1.4Bounding φ + from above26 3.2Theorem of Furstenberg and Kesten28 3.3Herman’s formula29 3.4Theorem of Oseledets in dimension 230 vii viiiContents 3.4.1One-sided theorem30 3.4.2Two-sided theorem34 3.5Notes36 3.6Exercises36 4Multiplicative ergodic theorem38 4.1Statements38 4.2Proof of the one-sided theorem40 4.2.1Constructing the Oseledets flag40 4.2.2Measurability41 4.2.3Time averages of skew products44 4.2.4Applications to linear cocycles47 4.2.5Dimension reduction48 4.2.6Completion of the proof52 4.3Proof of the two-sided theorem53 4.3.1Upgrading to a decomposition53 4.3.2Subexponential decay of angles55 4.3.3Consequences of subexponential decay56 4.4Two useful constructions59 4.4.1Inducing and Lyapunov exponents59 4.4.2Invariant cones61 4.5Notes63 4.6Exercises64 5Stationary measures67 5.1Random transformations67 5.2Stationary measures70 5.3Ergodic stationary measures75 5.4Invertible random transformations77 5.4.1Lift of an invariant measure79 5.4.2s-states andu-states81 5.5Disintegrations ofs-states andu-states85 5.5.1Conditional probabilities85 5.5.2Martingale construction86 5.5.3Remarks on 2-dimensional linear cocycles89 5.6Notes91 5.7Exercises91 6Exponents and invariant measures96 6.1Representation of Lyapunov exponents97 6.2Furstenberg’s formula102 6.2.1Irreducible cocycles102 Contentsix 6.2.2Continuity of exponents for irreducible cocycles103 6.3Theorem of Furstenberg105 6.3.1Non-atomic measures106 6.3.2Convergence to a Dirac mass108 6.3.3Proof of Theorem 6.11111 6.4Notes112 6.5Exercises113 7Invariance principle115 7.1Statement and proof116 7.2Entropy is smaller than exponents117 7.2.1The volume case118 7.2.2Proof of Proposition 7.4.119 7.3Furstenberg’s criterion124 7.4Lyapunov exponents of typical cocycles125 7.4.1Eigenvalues and eigenspaces126 7.4.2Proof of Theorem 7.12128 7.5Notes130 7.6Exercises131 8Simplicity133 8.1Pinching and twisting133 8.2Proof of the simplicity criterion134 8.3Invariant section137 8.3.1Grassmannian structures137 8.3.2Linear arrangements and the twisting property139 8.3.3Control of eccentricity140 8.3.4Convergence of conditional probabilities143 8.4Notes147 8.5Exercises147 9Generic cocycles150 9.1Semi-continuity151 9.2Theorem of Ma ̃n ́e–Bochi153 9.2.1Interchanging the Oseledets subspaces155 9.2.2Coboundary sets157 9.2.3Proof of Theorem 9.5160 9.2.4Derivative cocycles and higher dimensions161 9.3H ̈older examples of discontinuity164 9.4Notes168 9.5Exercises169 xContents 10Continuity171 10.1Invariant subspaces172 10.2Expanding points in projective space174 10.3Proof of the continuity theorem176 10.4Couplings and energy178 10.5Conclusion of the proof181 10.5.1 Proof of Proposition 10.9183 10.6Final comments186 10.7Notes189 10.8Exercises189 References191 Index198 Preface 1.The study of characteristic exponents originated from the fundamental work of Aleksandr Mikhailovich Lyapunov \[85\] on the stability ofsolutions of dif- ferential equations. Consider a linear equation ̇v(t) =B(t)v(t)(1) whereB()is a bounded function fromRto the space ofd×dmatrices. By the general theory of differential equations, there exists a so-calledfundamental matrix A t ,t∈Rsuch thatv(t) =A t v 0 is the unique solution of (1) with initial conditionv(0) =v 0 . If thecharacteristic exponents λ(v) =lim sup t→∞ 1 t logkA t vk(2) are negative, for allv6=0, then the trivial solutionv(t)≡0 is asymptotically stable, and even exponentially asymptotically stable. Thestability theorem of Lyapunov asserts that, under an additional regularity condition, stability re- mains valid for nonlinear perturbations ̇w(t) =B(t)w(t)+F(t,w)withkF(t,w)k ≤constkwk 1+ ε . That is, the trivial solutionw(t)≡0 is still exponentially asymptotically stable. The regularity condition of Lyapunov means, essentially, that the limit in (2) does exist, even if one replaces vectorsvbyl-vectorsv 1 ∧  ∧v l ; that is, elements of thek-exterior power ofR d , for any 0≤l≤d. This is usually difficult to check in specific situations. But the multiplicative ergodic theorem of Oseledets asserts that Lyapunov regularity holds with full probability, in great generality. In particular, it holds on almost every flow trajectory, relative to any probability measure invariant under the flow. 2.The work of Furstenberg, Kesten, Oseledets, Kingman, Ledrappier, Guiv- arc’h, Raugi, Gol’dsheid, Margulis and other mathematicians, mostly in the xi xiiPreface 1960s–80s, built the study of Lyapunov characteristic exponents into a very active research field in its own right, and one with an unusually vast array of in- teractions with other areas of Mathematics and Physics, such as stochastic pro- cesses (random matrices and, more generally, random walks on groups), spec- tral theory (Schr ̈odinger-type operators) and smooth dynamics (non-uniform hyperbolicity), to mention just a few. My own involvement with the subject goes back to the late 20thcentury and was initially motivated by my work with Christian Bonatti and Jos ́e F. Alves on the ergodic theory of partially hyperbolic diffeomorphisms and, soon afterwards, with Jairo Bochi on the dependence of Lyapunov exponents on the underlying dynamical system. The way these two projects unfolded very much inspired the choice of topics in the present book. 3.A diffeomorphismf:M→Mis calledpartially hyperbolicif there exists aD f-invariant decomposition T M=E s ⊕E c ⊕E u of the tangent bundle such thatE s is uniformly contracted andE u is uniformly expanded by the derivativeD f, whereas the behavior ofD falong thecenter bundle E c lies somewhere in between. It soon became apparent that to improve our understanding of such systems one should try to get a better hold of the behavior ofD f|E c and, in particular, of its Lyapunov exponents. In doing this, we turned to the classical linear theory for inspiration. That program proved to be very fruitful, as much in the linearcontext (e.g. the proof of the Zorich–Kontsevich conjecture, by Artur Avila and myself) as in the setting of partially hyperbolic dynamics we had in mind originally (e.g the rigidity results by Artur Avila, Amie Wilkinson and myself), and remains very active to date, with important contributions from several mathematicians. 4.Before that, in the early 1980s, Ricardo Ma ̃n ́e came to the surprising conclu- sion that generic (a residual subset of) volume-preservingC 1 diffeomorphisms on any surface have zero Lyapunov exponents, or else they areglobally hyper- bolic (Anosov); in fact, the second alternative is possibleonly if the surface is the torusT 2 . This discovery went against the intuition drawn from the classical theory of Furstenberg. Although Ma ̃n ́e did not write a complete proof of his findings, his approach was successfully completed by Bochi almost two decades later. Moreover, the conclusions were extended to arbitrary dimension, both in the volume-preserv- ing and in the symplectic case, by Bochi and myself. Prefacexiii 5.In this monograph I have sought to cover the fundamental aspects of the classical theory (mostly in Chapters 1 through 6), as well asto introduce some of the more recent developments (Chapters 7 through 10). The text started from a graduate course that I taught at IMPA during the (southern hemisphere) summer term of 2010. The very first draft consisted of lecture notes taken by Carlos Bocker, Jos ́e R ́egis Var ̃ao and Samuel Feitosa. The unpublished notes \[9\] and \[28\], by Artur Avila and Jairo Bochi were im- portant for setting up the first part of the course. The material was reviewed and expanded later that year, in myseminar, with the help of graduate students and post-docs of IMPA’s Dynamics group. I taught the course again in early 2014, and I took that occasion to add some proofs, to reorganize the exercises and to include historicnotes in each of the chapters. Chapter 10 was completely rewritten and this preface was also much expanded. 6.The diagram below describes the logical connections between the ten chap- ters. The first two form an introductory cycle. In Chapter 1 weoffer a glimpse of what is going to come by stating three main results, whose proofs will ap- pear, respectively, in Chapters 3, 6 and 10. In Chapter 2 we introduce the no- tion of linear cocycle, upon which is built the rest of the text. We examine more closely the particular case of hyperbolic cocycles, especially in dimension 2, as this will be useful in Chapter 9. Ch. 1Ch. 2 Ch. 3Ch. 4Ch. 5Ch. 6 Ch. 7Ch. 8Ch. 9Ch. 10 In the next four chapters we present the main classical results, including the Furstenberg–Kesten theorem and the subadditive ergodic theorem of King- man (Chapter 3), the multiplicative ergodic theorem of Oseledets (Chapter 4), Ledrappier’s exponent representation theorem, Furstenberg’s formula for ex- ponents of irreducible cocycles and Furstenberg’s simplicity theorem in dimen- sion 2 (Chapter 6). The proof of the multiplicative ergodic theorem is based on the subadditive ergodic theorem and also heralds the connection between Lya- xivPreface punov exponents and invariant/stationary measures that lies at the heart of the results in Chapter 6. In Chapter 5 we provide general tools todevelop that connection, in both the invertible and the non-invertible case. 7.The last four chapters are devoted to more advanced material. The main goal there is to provide a friendly introduction to the existing research litera- ture. Thus, the emphasis is on transparency rather than generality or complete- ness. This means that, as a rule, we choose to state the results in the simplest possible (yet relevant) setting, with suitable referencesgiven for stronger state- ments. Chapter 7 introduces the invariance principle and exploitssome of its con- sequences, in the context of locally constant linear cocycles. This includes Furstenberg’s criterion for λ − = λ + , that extends Furstenberg’s simplicity the- orem to arbitrary dimension. The invariance principle has been used recently to analyze much more general dynamical systems, linear and nonlinear, whose Lyapunov exponents vanish. A finer extension of Furstenberg’s theorem ap- pears in Chapter 8, where we present a criterion for simplicity of the whole Lyapunov spectrum. Then, in Chapter 9, we turn our attention to the contrasting Ma ̃n ́e–Bochi phenomenon of systems whose Lyapunov spectra are genericallynotsim- ple. We prove an instance of the Ma ̃n ́e–Bochi theorem, for continuous linear cocycles. Moreover, we explain how those methods can be adapted to con- struct examples of discontinuous dependence of Lyapunov exponents on the cocycle, even in the H ̈older-continuous category. Having raised the issue of (dis)continuity, in Chapter 10 we prove that for products ofrandom matrices in GL(2)the Lyapunov exponents do depend continuously on the cocycle data. 8.Each chapter ends with set of notes and a list of exercises. Some of the ex- ercises are actually used in the proofs. They should be viewed as an invitation for the reader to take an active part in the arguments. Throughout, it is assumed that the reader is familiar with the basic ideas of Measure Theory, Differential Topology and Ergodic Theory. All that is needed can be found,for instance, in my book with Krerley Oliveira,Fundamentos da Teoria Erg ́ odica\[114\]; a translation into English is under way. I thank David Tranah, of Cambridge University Press, for hisinterest in this book and for patiently waiting for the writing to be completed. I am also grateful to Vaughn Climenhaga, and David himself, for a careful revision of the manuscript that very much helped improve the presentation. Rio de Janeiro, March, 2014 Marcelo Viana 1 Introduction This chapter is a kind of overture. Simplified statements of three theorems are presented that set the tone for the whole text. Much broader versions of these theorems will appear later and several other themes around them will be introduced and developed as we move on. At this initial stagewe choose to focus on the following special, yet significant, setting. LetA 1 , . . . ,A m be invertible 2×2 real matrices and letp 1 , . . . ,p m be positive numbers withp 1 ++p m =1. Consider L n =L n−1 L 1 L 0 ,n≥1, where theL j are independent random variables with identical probability dis- tributions, such that the probability of{L j =A i }is equal top i for allj≥0 andi=1,...,m. In brief, our goal is to describe the (almost certain) behavior ofL n asn→∞. 1.1 Existence of Lyapunov exponents We begin with the following seminal result of Furstenberg and Kesten \[56\]: Theorem 1.1There exist real numbers λ + and λ − such that lim n 1 n logkL n k= λ + andlim n 1 n logk(L n ) −1 k −1 = λ − with full probability. The numbers λ + and λ − are calledextremal Lyapunov exponents. Clearly, λ + ≥ λ − (1.1) 1 2Introduction becausekBk ≥ kB −1 k −1 for any invertible matrixB. IfBhas determinant±1 then we even havekBk ≥1≥ kB −1 k −1 . Hence, λ + ≥0≥ λ − (1.2) when all matricesA i , 1≤i≤mhave determinant±1. 1.2 Pinching and twisting Next, we discuss conditions for the inequalities (1.1) and (1.2) to be strict. LetBbe themonoidgenerated by the matricesA i ,i=1,...,m; that is, the set of all productsA k 1 A k n with 1≤k j ≤mandn≥0 (forn=0 interpret the product to be the identity matrix). We say thatBispinchingif for any constant κ>1 there exists someB∈Bsuch that kBk> κkB −1 k −1 .(1.3) This means that the images of the unit circle under the elements ofBare ellipses with arbitrarily large eccentricity. See Figure 1.1. B 1 kBk kB −1 k −1 Figure 1.1 Eccentricity and pinching We say that the monoidBistwistingif given any vector linesF,G 1 , . . . , G n ⊂R 2 there existsB∈Bsuch that B(F)/∈ {G 1 ,...,G n }.(1.4) The following result is a variation of a theorem of Furstenberg \[54\]: Theorem 1.2AssumeBis pinching and twisting. Then λ − < λ + . In partic- ular, if|detA i |=1for all1≤i≤m then both extremal Lyapunov exponents are different from zero. 1.3 Continuity of Lyapunov exponents3 1.3 Continuity of Lyapunov exponents The extremal Lyapunov exponents λ + and λ − may be viewed as functions of the data A 1 ,...,A m ,p 1 ,...,p m . Let the matricesA j vary in the linear group GL(2)of invertible 2×2 matrices and the probability vectors(p 1 ,...,p m )vary in the open simplex ∆ m ={(p 1 ,...,p m ):p 1 >0,...,p m >0 andp 1 ++p m =1}. The following result is part of a theorem of Bocker and Viana \[35\]: Theorem 1.3The extremal Lyapunov exponents λ ± depend continuously on (A 1 ,...,A m ,p 1 ,...,p m )∈GL(2) m ×∆ m at all points. Example 1.4Letm=2, with A 1 = ( σ0 0 σ −1 ) andA 2 =R θ A 1 R − θ ,R θ = ( cos θ−sinθ sinθcosθ ) for some σ>1 andθ∈R. By Theorem 1.3, the Lyapunov exponentsλ ± depend continuously on the parameter σandθ. Moreover, using Theorem 1.2, we have λ + =0 if and only ifp 1 =p 2 =1/2 and θ=π/2+nπfor somen∈Z. 1.4 Notes Theorem 1.1 is a special case of the theorem of Furstenberg and Kesten \[56\], which is valid in any dimensiond≥2. The full statement and the proof will appear in Chapter 3: we will deduce this theorem from an even more general statement, the subadditive ergodic theorem of Kingman \[74\]. Kingman’s theo- rem will also be used in Chapter 4 to prove the fundamental result of the theory of Lyapunov exponents, the multiplicative ergodic theoremof Oseledets \[92\]. It is natural to ask whether the type of asymptotic behavior prescribed by Theorem 1.1 for the normkL n kand conormk(L n ) −1 k −1 extends to the indi- vidualmatrix coefficients L n i,j . Furstenberg, Kesten \[56\] proved that this is so if the coefficients of the matricesA i , 1≤i≤mare all strictly positive. The ex- ample in Exercise 1.3 shows that this assumption cannot be removed. On the other hand, the theorem of Oseledets theorem does contain such a description for the matrixcolumn vectors. Theorem 1.2 is also the tip of a series of fundamental results, which are to be discussed in Chapters 6 through 8. The full statement and proof of Fursten- berg’s theorem for 2-dimensional cocycles (Furstenberg \[54\]) will be given in 4Introduction Chapter 6. The extension to any dimension will be stated and proved in Chap- ter 7: it will be deduced from the invariance principle (Ledrappier \[81\], Bon- atti, Gomez-Mont and Viana \[37\], Avila and Viana \[16\], Avila, Santamaria and Viana \[13\]), a general tool that has several other applications, both for linear and nonlinear systems. In dimension larger than 2, there is a more ambitious problem: rather than asking when λ − < λ + , one wants to know whenallthe Lyapunov exponents are distinct. That will be the subject of Chapter 8, which is based on Avila and Viana \[14, 15\]. Furstenberg and Kifer \[57\] proved continuity of the Lyapunov exponents of products of random matrices, restricted to the (almost) irreducible case. A vari- ation of their argument will be given in Section 6.2.2. The reducible case re- quires a delicate analysis of the random walk defined by the cocycle in projec- tive space. That was carried out by Bocker and Viana \[35\], in the 2-dimensional case, using certain discretizations of projective space. At the time of writing, Avila, Eskin and Viana \[12\] are extending the statement of the theorem to arbi- trary dimension, using a very different strategy. The proofof Theorem 1.3 that we present in Chapter 10 is based on this more recent approach. The problem of the dependence of Lyapunov exponents on the data can be formulated in the broader context of linear cocycles thatwe are going to introduce in Chapter 2. We will see in Chapter 9 that, in contrast, continuity often breaks down in that generality. 1.5 Exercises The following elementary notions are used in some of the exercises that fol- low. We call a 2×2 matrixhyperbolicif it has two distinct real eigenvalues, parabolicif it has a unique real eigenvalue, with a one-dimensional eigenspace, andellipticif it has two distinct complex eigenvalues. Multiples of theidentity belong to neither of these three classes. Exercise 1.1Show that, in dimensiond=2, if|detA i |=1 for all 1≤i≤m then λ + + λ − =0. Exercise 1.2Calculate the extremal Lyapunov exponents form=2 andp 1 , p 2 >0 withp 1 +p 2 =1 and (1)A 1 = ( σ0 0 σ −1 ) andA 2 = ( σ −1 0 0 σ ) , where σ>1; 1.5 Exercises5 (2)A 1 = ( σ0 0 σ −1 ) andA 2 = ( 0−1 10 ) , where σ>1. Exercise 1.3(Furstenberg and Kesten \[56\]) Takem=2 withp 1 =p 2 =1/2 and A 1 = ( 20 01 ) andA 2 = ( 0 1 1 0 ) . Show that lim n (1/n)log|L n i,j |does not exist for anyi,j, with full probability. Exercise 1.4Show that if some matrixA i , 1≤i≤mis either hyperbolic or parabolic then the monoidBis pinching. Exercise 1.5Show that the monoidBmay be pinching even if all the matri- cesA i , 1≤i≤mare elliptic. Exercise 1.6Suppose that there exists 1≤i≤msuch thatA i is conjugate to an irrational rotation. Conclude thatBis twisting. Exercise 1.7Suppose that there exist 1≤i,j≤msuch thatA i andA j are either hyperbolic or parabolic and that they have no common eigenspace. Con- clude thatBis twisting (and pinching). Exercise 1.8LetA i ,i=1,2 be as in the second part of Exercise 1.2. Check that λ + (A 1 ,A 2 ,1,0)6=lim p 2 →0 λ + (A 1 ,A 2 ,1−p 2 ,p 2 ). Thus, the hypothesisp 1 >0,...,p m >0 cannot be removed in Theorem 1.3. References \[1\] P. Anderson.Absence of diffusion in certain random lattices.Phys. Rev., 109:1492–1505, 1958. \[2\] D. V. Anosov. Geodesic flows on closed Riemannian manifolds of negative curvature.Proc. Steklov Math. Inst., 90:1–235, 1967. \[3\] V. Ara ́ujo and M. Bessa. Dominated splitting and zero volume for incompress- ible three-flows.Nonlinearity, 21:1637–1653, 2008. \[4\] A. Arbieto and J. Bochi.L p -generic cocycles have one-point Lyapunov spec- trum.Stoch. Dyn., 3:73–81, 2003. \[5\] L. Arnold.Random Dynamical Systems. Springer-Verlag, 1998. \[6\] L. Arnold and N. D. Cong. On the simplicity of the Lyapunovspectrum of products of random matrices.Ergod. Theory Dynam. Sys., 17:1005–1025, 1997. \[7\] L. Arnold and V. Wishtutz (Eds.).Lyapunov Exponents (Bremen, 1984), volume 1186 ofLecture Notes in Math.Springer, 1986. \[8\] A. Avila. Density of positive Lyapunov exponents for quasiperiodic SL(2,R)- cocycles in arbitrary dimension.J. Mod. Dyn., 3:631–636, 2009. \[9\] A. Avila and J. Bochi. Lyapunov exponents: parts I & II. Notes of mini-course given at the School on Dynamical Systems, ICTP, 2008. \[10\] A. Avila and J. Bochi. Proof of the subadditive ergodic theorem. Preprint www.mat.puc-rio.br/∼jairo/. \[11\] A. Avila and J. Bochi. A formula with some applications to the theory of Lya- punov exponents.Israel J. Math., 131:125–137, 2002. \[12\] A. Avila, A .Eskin and M. Viana. Continuity of Lyapunov exponents of random matrix products. In preparation. \[13\] A. Avila, J. Santamaria, and M. Viana. Holonomy invariance: rough regularity and Lyapunov exponents.Ast ́erisque, 358:13–74, 2013. \[14\] A. Avila and M. Viana. Simplicity of Lyapunov spectra: asufficient criterion. Port. Math., 64:311–376, 2007. \[15\] A. Avila and M. Viana. Simplicity of Lyapunov spectra: proof of the Zorich- Kontsevich conjecture.Acta Math., 198:1–56, 2007. \[16\] A. Avila and M. Viana. Extremal Lyapunov exponents: an invariance principle and applications.Inventiones Math., 181:115–178, 2010. \[17\] A. Avila, M. Viana, and A. Wilkinson. Absolute continuity, Lyapunov exponents and rigidity I: geodesic flows. Preprint www.preprint.impa.br 2011. 7 8References \[18\] L. Barreira and Ya. Pesin.Nonuniform Hyperbolicity: Dynamics of Systems with Nonzero Lyapunov Exponents. Cambridge University Press, 2007. \[19\] L. Barreira, Ya. Pesin and J. Schmeling. Dimension and product structure of hyperbolic measures.Ann. of Math., 149:755–783, 1999. \[20\] M. Bessa. Dynamics of generic 2-dimensional linear differential systems.J. Differential Equations, 228:685–706, 2006. \[21\] M. Bessa.The Lyapunov exponents of generic zero divergence three- dimensional vector fields.Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems, 27:1445–1472, 2007. \[22\] M. Bessa. Dynamics of generic multidimensional lineardifferential systems. Adv. Nonlinear Stud., 8:191–211, 2008. \[23\] M. Bessa and J. L. Dias. Generic dynamics of 4-dimensionalC 2 Hamiltonian systems.Comm. Math. Phys., 281:597–619, 2008. \[24\] M. Bessa and J. Rocha. Contributions to the geometric and ergodic theory of conservative flows.Ergodic Theory Dynam. Sys., 33:1709–1731, 2013. \[25\] M. Bessa and H. Vilarinho. Fine properties of lp-cocycles.J. Differential Equa- tions, 256:2337–2367, 2014. \[26\] G. Birkhoff.Lattice Theory, volume 25. A.M.S. Colloq. Publ., 1967. \[27\] J. Bochi. Discontinuity of the Lyapunov exponents for non-hyperbolic cocycles. Preprint www.mat.puc-rio.br/∼jairo/. \[28\] J. Bochi.The multiplicative ergodic theorem of Oseledets.Preprint www.mat.puc-rio.br/∼jairo/. \[29\] J. Bochi. Proof of the Oseledets theorem in dimension 2 via hyperbolic geometry. Preprint www.mat.puc-rio.br/∼jairo/. \[30\] J. Bochi. Genericity of zero Lyapunov exponents.Ergod. Theory Dynam. Sys., 22:1667–1696, 2002. \[31\] J. Bochi.C 1 -generic symplectic diffeomorphisms: partial hyperbolicity and zero centre Lyapunov exponents.J. Inst. Math. Jussieu, 8:49–93, 2009. \[32\] J. Bochi and M. Viana. Pisa lectures on Lyapunov exponents. InDynamical Sys- tems. Part II, Pubbl. Cent. Ric. Mat. Ennio Giorgi, pages 23–47. Scuola Norm. Sup., 2003. \[33\] J. Bochi and M. Viana. Lyapunov exponents: how frequently are dynamical systems hyperbolic? InModern Dynamical Systems and Applications, pages 271–297. Cambridge University Press, 2004. \[34\] J. Bochi and M. Viana. The Lyapunov exponents of genericvolume-preserving and symplectic maps.Ann. of Math., 161:1423–1485, 2005. \[35\] C. Bocker and M. Viana. Continuity of Lyapunov exponents for 2D random matrices. Preprint www.impa.br/∼viana/out/bernoulli.pdf. \[36\] C. Bonatti, L. J. D ́ıaz, and M. Viana.Dynamics Beyond Uniform Hyperbolicity, volume 102 ofEncyclopaedia of Mathematical Sciences. Springer-Verlag, 2005. \[37\] C. Bonatti, X. G ́omez-Mont, and M. Viana. G ́en ́ericit ́e d’exposants de Lyapunov non-nuls pour des produits d ́eterministes de matrices.Ann. Inst. H. Poincar ́e Anal. Non Lin ́eaire, 20:579–624, 2003. \[38\] C. Bonatti and M. Viana. SRB measures for partially hyperbolic systems whose central direction is mostly contracting.Israel J. Math., 115:157–193, 2000. \[39\] N. Bourbaki.Algebra. I. Chapters 1–3. Elements of Mathematics (Berlin). Springer-Verlag, 1989. Translated from the French, Reprint of the 1974 edition. References9 \[40\] J. Bourgain. Positivity and continuity of the Lyapounov exponent for shifts on T d with arbitrary frequency vector and real analytic potential.J. Anal. Math., 96:313–355, 2005. \[41\] J. Bourgain and S. Jitomirskaya. Continuity of the Lyapunov exponent for quasiperiodic operators with analytic potential.J. Statist. Phys., 108:1203–1218, 2002. \[42\] M. Cambrainha.Generic symplectic cocycles are hyperbolic. PhD thesis, IMPA, 2013. \[43\] C. Castaing and M. Valadier.Convex Analysis and Measurable Multifunctions. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 580. Springer-Verlag, 1977. \[44\] J. E. Cohen, H. Kesten, and C. M. Newman (Eds.).Random Matrices and their Applications (Brunswick, Maine, 1984), volume 50 ofContemp. Math.Amer. Math. Soc., 1986. \[45\] J. Conway.Functions of One Complex Variable. II, volume 159 ofGraduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, 1995. \[46\] A. Crisanti, G.Paladin, and A. Vulpiani.Products of Random Matrices in Statis- tical Physics, volume 104 ofSpringer Series in Solid-State Sciences. Springer- Verlag, 1993. With a foreword by Giorgio Parisi. \[47\] D. Damanik. Schr ̈odinger operators with dynamically defined potentials. In preparation. \[48\] David Damanik.Lyapunov exponents and spectral analysis of ergodic Schr ̈odinger operators: a survey of Kotani theory and its applications. InSpec- tral Theory and Mathematical Physics: a Festschrift in Honor of Barry Simon’s 60th birthday, volume 76 ofProc. Sympos. Pure Math., pages 539–563. Amer. Math. Soc., 2007. \[49\] L. J. D ́ıaz and R. Ures. Persistent homoclinic tangencies at the unfolding of cycles.Ann. Inst. H. Poincar ́e, Anal. Non-lin ́eaire, 11:643–659, 1996. \[50\] A. Douady and J. C. Earle. Conformally natural extension of homeomorphisms of the circle.Acta Math., 157:23–48, 1986. \[51\] R. Dudley, H. Kunita, F. Ledrappier, and P. Hennequin (Eds.). ́ Ecole d’ ́et ́e de probabilit ́es de Saint-Flour, XII—1982, volume 1097 ofLecture Notes in Math. Springer, 1984. \[52\] J. Franks. Anosov diffeomorphisms. InGlobal Analysis (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. XIV, Berkeley, Calif., 1968), pages 61–93. Amer. Math. Soc., 1970. \[53\] N. Friedman.Introduction to Ergodic Theory. Van Nostrand, 1969. \[54\] H. Furstenberg. Non-commuting random products.Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 108:377–428, 1963. \[55\] H. Furstenberg. Boundary theory and stochastic processes on homogeneous spaces. InHarmonic Analysis in Homogeneous Spaces, volume XXVI ofProc. Sympos. Pure Math. (Williamstown MA, 1972), pages 193–229. Amer. Math. Soc., 1973. \[56\] H. Furstenberg and H. Kesten. Products of random matrices.Ann. Math. Statist., 31:457–469, 1960. \[57\] H. Furstenberg and Yu. Kifer. Random matrix products and measures in projec- tive spaces.Israel J. Math, 10:12–32, 1983. \[58\] I. Ya. Gol’dsheid and G. A. Margulis. Lyapunov indices of a product of random matrices.Uspekhi Mat. Nauk., 44:13–60, 1989. 10References \[59\] Y. Guivarc’h. Marches al ́eatories \`a pas markovien.Comptes Rendus Acad. Sci. Paris, 289:211–213, 1979. \[60\] Y. Guivarc’h and A. Raugi. Products of random matrices:convergence theorems. Contemp. Math., 50:31–54, 1986. \[61\] H. Hennion.Loi des grands nombres et perturbations pour des produits r ́eductibles de matrices al ́eatoires ind ́ependantes.Z. Wahrsch. Verw. Gebiete, 67:265–278, 1984. \[62\] M. Herman. Une m ́ethode nouvelle pour minorer les exposants de Lyapunov et quelques exemples montrant le caract\`ere local d’un th ́eor\`eme d’Arnold et de Moser sur le tore de dimension 2.Comment. Math. Helvetici, 58:453–502, 1983. \[63\] A. Herrera.Simplicity of the Lyapunov spectrum for multidimensional continued fraction algorithms. PhD thesis, IMPA, 2009. \[64\] F. Rodriguez Hertz, M. A. Rodriguez Hertz, A. Tahzibi, and R. Ures. Maxi- mizing measures for partially hyperbolic systems with compact center leaves. Ergodic Theory Dynam. Sys., 32:825–839, 2012. \[65\] E. Hopf.Statistik der geod ̈atischen Linien in Mannigfaltigkeiten negativer Kr ̈ummung.Ber. Verh. S ̈achs. Akad. Wiss. Leipzig, 91:261–304, 1939. \[66\] S. Jitomirskaya and C. Marx. Dynamics and spectral theory of quasi-periodic Schr ̈odinger type operators. In preparation. \[67\] R. Johnson. Lyapounov numbers for the almost periodic Schr ̈odinger equation. Illinois J. Math., 28:397–419, 1984. \[68\] A. Katok. Lyapunov exponents, entropy and periodic points of diffeomorphisms. Publ. Math. IHES, 51:137–173, 1980. \[69\] Y. Katznelson and B. Weiss. A simple proof of some ergodic theorems.Israel J. Math., 42:291–296, 1982. \[70\] Yu. Kifer. Perturbations of random matrix products.Z. Wahrsch. Verw. Gebiete, 61:83–95, 1982. \[71\] Yu. Kifer.Ergodic Theory of Random Perturbations. Birkh ̈auser, 1986. \[72\] Yu. Kifer. General random perturbations of hyperbolicand expanding transfor- mations.J. Analyse Math., 47:11–150, 1986. \[73\] Yu. Kifer and E. Slud. Perturbations of random matrix products in a reducible case.Ergodic Theory Dynam. Sys., 2:367–382 (1983), 1982. \[74\] J. Kingman. The ergodic theorem of subadditive stochastic processes.J. Royal Statist. Soc., 30:499–510, 1968. \[75\] O. Knill. The upper Lyapunov exponent of SL(2,R)cocycles: discontinuity and the problem of positivity. InLyapunov Exponents (Oberwolfach, 1990), volume 1486 ofLecture Notes in Math., pages 86–97. Springer-Verlag, 1991. \[76\] O. Knill. Positive Lyapunov exponents for a dense set ofbounded measurable SL(2,R)-cocycles.Ergod. Theory Dynam. Sys., 12:319–331, 1992. \[77\] S. Kotani. Lyapunov indices determine absolutely continuous spectra of sta- tionary random one-dimensional Schr ̈odinger operators. InStochastic Analysis, pages 225–248. North Holland, 1984. \[78\] H. Kunz and Bernard B. Souillard. Sur le spectre des op ́erateurs aux diff ́erences finies al ́eatoires.Comm. Math. Phys., 78:201–246, 1980/81. \[79\] F. Ledrappier. Propri ́et ́es ergodiques des mesures deSina ̈ıPubl. Math. I.H.E.S., 59:163–188, 1984. References11 \[80\] F. Ledrappier. Quelques propri ́et ́es des exposants caract ́eristiques. volume 1097 ofLect. Notes in Math., pages 305–396, Springer-Verlag, 1984. \[81\] F. Ledrappier. Positivity of the exponent for stationary sequences of matrices. InLyapunov Exponents (Bremen, 1984), volume 1186 ofLect. Notes in Math., pages 56–73. Springer-Verlag, 1986. \[82\] F. Ledrappier and G. Royer.Croissance exponentielle de certain produits al ́eatorires de matrices.Comptes Rendus Acad. Sci. Paris, 290:513–514, 1980. \[83\] F. Ledrappier and L.-S. Young The metric entropy of diffeomorphisms. I. Char- acterization of measures satisfying Pesin’s entropy formula.Ann. of Math., 122:509–539, 1985. \[84\] F. Ledrappier and L.-S. Young The metric entropy of diffeomorphisms. II. Rela- tions between entropy, exponents and dimension.Ann. of Math., 122:540–574, 1985. \[85\] A. M. Lyapunov.The General Problem of the Stability of Motion. Taylor & Fran- cis Ltd., 1992. Translated from Edouard Davaux’s French translation (1907) of the 1892 Russian original and edited by A.T. Fuller, with an introduction and preface by Fuller, a biography of Lyapunov by V.I. Smirnov, and a bibliogra- phy of Lyapunov’s works compiled by J.F. Barrett, Lyapunov centenary issue, Reprint ofInternat. J. Control55 (1992), no. 3 \[MR1154209 (93e:01035)\], With a foreword by Ian Stewart. \[86\] R. Ma ̃n ́e. A proof of Pesin’s formula.Ergod. Theory Dynam. Sys., 1:95–101, 1981. \[87\] R. Ma ̃n ́e. Lyapunov exponents and stable manifolds forcompact transforma- tions. InGeometric Dynamics, volume 1007 ofLect. Notes in Math., pages 522–577. Springer-Verlag, 1982. \[88\] R. Ma ̃n ́e. Oseledec’s theorem from the generic viewpoint. InProcs. Interna- tional Congress of Mathematicians, Vol. 1, 2 (Warsaw, 1983), pages 1269–1276, Warsaw, 1984. PWN Publ. \[89\] R. Ma ̃n ́e.Ergodic Theory and Differentiable Dynamics. Springer-Verlag, 1987. \[90\] A. Manning. There are no new Anosov diffeomorphisms on tori.Amer. J. Math., 96:422–429, 1974. \[91\] S. Newhouse. On codimension one Anosov diffeomorphisms.Amer. J. Math., 92:761–770, 1970. \[92\] V. I. Oseledets. A multiplicative ergodic theorem: Lyapunov characteristic num- bers for dynamical systems.Trans. Moscow Math. Soc., 19:197–231, 1968. \[93\] J. C. Oxtoby and S. M. Ulam. Measure-preserving homeomorphisms and metri- cal transitivity.Ann. of Math., 42:874–920, 1941. \[94\] ́ E. Le Page. Th ́eor\`emes limites pour les produits de matrices al ́eatoires. In Probability Measures on Groups (Oberwolfach, 1981), volume 928 ofLecture Notes in Math., pages 258–303. Springer-Verlag, 1982. \[95\] ́ E. Le Page. R ́egularit ́e du plus grand exposant caract ́eristique des produits de matrices al ́eatoires ind ́ependantes et applications.Ann. Inst. H. Poincar ́e Probab. Statist., 25:109–142, 1989. \[96\] J. Palis and S. Smale. Structural stability theorems. InGlobal Analysis, volume XIV ofProc. Sympos. Pure Math. (Berkeley 1968), pages 223–232. Amer. Math. Soc., 1970. 12References \[97\] L. Pastur. Spectral properties of disordered systems in the one-body approxima- tion.Comm. Math. Phys., 75:179–196, 1980. \[98\] Y. Peres. Analytic dependence of Lyapunov exponents ontransition probabil- ities. InLyapunov Exponents (Oberwolfach, 1990), volume 1486 ofLecture Notes in Math., pages 64–80. Springer-Verlag, 1991. \[99\] Ya. B. Pesin. Families of invariant manifolds corresponding to non-zero charac- teristic exponents.Math. USSR. Izv., 10:1261–1302, 1976. \[100\] Ya. B. Pesin. Characteristic Lyapunov exponents and smooth ergodic theory. Russian Math. Surveys, 324:55–114, 1977. \[101\] M. S. Raghunathan. A proof of Oseledec’s multiplicative ergodic theorem.Israel J. Math., 32:356–362, 1979. \[102\] V. A. Rokhlin. On the fundamental ideas of measure theory.A. M. S. Transl., 10:1–54, 1962. Transl. from Mat. Sbornik 25 (1949), 107–150. First published by the A. M. S. in 1952 as Translation Number 71. \[103\] G. Royer. Croissance exponentielle de produits markoviens de matrices.Ann. Inst. H. Poincar ́e, 16:49–62, 1980. \[104\] D. Ruelle. Analyticity properties of the characteristic exponents of random ma- trix products.Adv. in Math., 32:68–80, 1979. \[105\] D. Ruelle. Ergodic theory of differentiable dynamical systems.Inst. Hautes ́ Etudes Sci. Publ. Math., 50:27–58, 1979. \[106\] D. Ruelle. Characteristic exponents and invariant manifolds in Hilbert space. Annals of Math., 115:243–290, 1982. \[107\] M. Shub.Global Stability of Dynamical Systems. Springer-Verlag, 1987. \[108\] B. Simon and M. Taylor. Harmonic analysis on SL(2,R)and smoothness of the density of states in the one-dimensional Anderson model.Comm. Math. Phys., 101:1–19, 1985. \[109\] S. Smale. Differentiable dynamical systems.Bull. Am. Math. Soc., 73:747–817, 1967. \[110\] A. Tahzibi. Stably ergodic diffeomorphisms which arenot partially hyperbolic. Israel J. Math., 142:315–344, 2004. \[111\] Ph. Thieullen. Ergodic reduction of random products of two-by-two matrices.J. Anal. Math., 73:19–64, 1997. \[112\] M. Viana. Lyapunov exponents and strange attractors.In J.-P. Franc ̧oise, G. L. Naber, and S. T. Tsou, editors,Encyclopedia of Mathematical Physics. Elsevier, 2006. \[113\] M. Viana. Almost all cocycles over any hyperbolic system have nonvanishing Lyapunov exponents.Ann. of Math., 167:643–680, 2008. \[114\] M. Viana and K. Oliveira.Fundamentos da Teoria Erg ́odica. Colec ̧ ̃ao Fronteiras da Matem ́atica. Sociedade Brasileira de Matem ́atica, 2014. \[115\] M. Viana and J. Yang. Physical measures and absolute continuity for one- dimensional center directions.Ann. Inst. H. Poincar ́e Anal. Non Lin ́eaire, 30:845–877, 2013. \[116\] A. Virtser. On products of random matrices and operators.Th. Prob. Appl., 34:367–377, 1979. \[117\] P. Walters. A dynamical proof of the multiplicative ergodic theorem.Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 335:245–257, 1993. References13 \[118\] L.-S. Young. Some open sets of nonuniformly hyperbolic cocycles.Ergod. Theory Dynam. Sys., 13(2):409–415, 1993. \[119\] L.-S. Young. Ergodic theory of differentiable dynamical systems. InReal and Complex Dynamical Systems, volume NATO ASI Series, C-464, pages 293–336. Kluwer Acad. Publ., 1995. \[120\] A. C. Zaanen.Integration. North-Holland Publishing Co., 1967. Completely revised edition ofAn Introduction to the Theory of Integration. Index ∗ convolution, 174, 179 B t adjoint linear operator, 107 C(V,a) cone of widthaaroundV, 61 C 0 (P) space of continuous functions, 44 D f derivative of a smooth map, 8 E s ,E u stable and unstable bundles, 10, 57 E δ (ξ),e δ (η) δ-energy of a measure, 178, 179 E v ,E x slices of a set in a product space, 67, 91 G(d),G(k,d) Grassmannian, 16, 38 L 1 ( μ) space of integrable functions, 28 R θ rotation, 3 V ⊥ x orthogonal complement, 48 W s (x),W u (x) (global) stable and unstable sets, 187 W s loc (x),W u loc (x) local stable and unstable sets, 187 ∆ m open simplex, 3 ∆ r r-neighborhood of the diagonal, 180 Λ l E exteriorl-power, 57 Λ l d E decomposablel-vectors, 57 GL(d), GL(d,C) linear group, 6 PR d ,PC d projective space, real and complex, 17 SL(d), SL(d,C) special linear group, 6, 7 T d d-dimensional torus, 17 B(Y) Borel σ-algebra, 41 G(d) space of compactly supported measures on GL(d), 171 K(Y) space of compact subsets, 41 M( μ) space of measures projecting down to μ, 44 P(d) space of probability measures inPR d , 174 ecc(B) eccentricity of a linear map, 133 ℓ 2 space of square integrable sequences, 9 λ(x,v) Lyapunov exponent function, 40 λ + ,λ − extremal Lyapunov exponents, 1, 6 PF projective cocycle, 68 proj w u orthogonal projection, 175 α generic element of GL(d) N , 172 φ + , φ − positive and negative parts of a function, 20 p∗ η,p 1 ∗p 2 14 Index15 convolution, 174, 179 s n (x) most contracted vector, 31 u n (x) most expanded vector, 31 δ-energy of a measure, 178, 179 ε-concentrated measure, 144 C 0 topology, 153 C 1 topology, 161 l-vector, 57 decomposable, 57 L ∞ cocycle, 168 L p cocycle, 168 p-expanding point, 175 p-invariant point, 175 s-state, 81, 83, 86, 94, 149 su-state, 81 u-state, 81, 83, 86, 94, 149 additive sequence, 21 adjoint cocycle, 108 monoid, 148 operator, 69, 107 Anderson localization, 18 angle between subspaces, 39 Anosov diffeomorphism, 17, 161 aperiodic measure, 153, 155, 158 backward stationary measure, 78, 101 Baire space, 152 barycenter, 130 Bernoulli shift, 7 characteristic exponents, xi coboundary set, 158, 159, 170 cocycle L ∞ , 168 L p , 168 continuous, 154, 168 derivative, 161 fiber-bunched, 187 Grassmannian, 137 H ̈older continuous, 165, 187 inverse, 146 invertible, 34, 39 irreducible, 102 locally constant, 7 projective, 68, 92, 137 strongly irreducible, 102, 103 cohomological condition, 105 complete flag, 38 probability space, 38 conditional expectation, 86 probabilities, 85 cone, 61, 65 conformal barycenter, 130 conorm, 20 continuity theorem, 3, 171 contraction property, 189 convergence pointwise, 74 weak ∗ , 74 convolution, 174, 179, 189 diagonal, 183 coupling, 178 cross-ratio, 61 cylinder, 82, 87, 89, 170 decomposablel-vector, 57 derivative cocycle, 8, 161 determinant, 58 diagonal convolution, 183 push-forward, 183 dimension of a vector bundle, 8 disintegration, 85, 87 dominated decomposition, 65, 162, 163 duality, 69 eccentricity of a linear map, 133 elliptic matrix, 4 energy of a measure, 178, 179 ergodic decomposition, 95 decomposition theorem, 77 measure, 159, 167 stationary measure, 76 theorem of Birkhoff, 27 essentially invariant function, 21, 36 invariant set, 21 expectation, 86 exponents representation theorem, 97 exterior power, 57, 151 product, 57, 137 extremal Lyapunov exponents, 1 measure, 92 fiber-bunched cocycle, 187 fibered entropy, 117 16Index Jacobian, 117 first return map, 59, 158 time, 59 flag, 38 complete, 38 of Oseledets, 39, 41 formula of Furstenberg, 102 of Herman, 29 forward stationary measure, 78, 101 Furstenberg’s criterion, 2, 105, 124 formula, 102 geometric hyperplane, 137 subspace, 137 graph transform, 53 Grassmannian, 16, 38 cocycle, 137 manifold, 16, 38, 57 H ̈older continuity, 164 norm, 164 Hamiltonian operator, 18 Hausdorff distance, 190 Herman’s formula, 29 Hilbert metric, 61 holonomy stable, 188 unstable, 188 homogeneous measure, 143 hyperbolic cocycle, 17, 153 linear cocycle, 10, 15 matrix, 4 hyperbolicity non-uniform, 19 uniform, 10, 15 hyperplane, 137 section, 134, 137 inducing, 59, 166 interchanging subspaces, 155, 160, 166, 167 invariance principle, 115, 116 invariant function, 21 holonomies, 187 measure, 70, 79, 97 set, 21 inverse cocycle, 146 monoid, 139 invertible cocycle, 34, 39 invertible extension, 99, 101 irreducibility, 102 strong, 102, 134 irreducible cocycle, 102, 103 strongly, 102 Lebesgue space, 158 lift of a stationary measure, 81, 88, 89 of an invariant measure, 79–81 linear arrangement, 137, 139, 143 proper, 139 cocycle, 6 hyperbolic, 10, 15 invertible extension, 101 on a vector bundle, 8 derivative cocycle, 8 group, 6 special, 6, 7 invariance principle, 116 Schr ̈odinger cocycle, 9 section, 137 local stable set, 187 unstable set, 187 local product structure, 91 locally constant cocycle, 7, 96 skew product, 67 Lyapunov exponents, 39, 40, 53, 60 extremal, 1 spectrum, 39, 133 martingale, 86, 88 convergence theorem, 86 mass of a measure, 178 matrix elliptic, 4 hyperbolic, 4 parabolic, 4 meager subset, 152 measurable section, 99 sub-bundle, 64, 98 measure backward stationary, 78 ergodic, 76 extremal, 92 Index17 forward stationary, 78 invariant, 70 non-atomic, 102, 106 stationary, 70 monoid, 2, 134 most contracted subspace, 134, 140 vector, 11, 19, 31 most expanded subspace, 134, 140 vector, 11, 19, 31 multiplicative ergodic theorem one-sided, 30, 38 two-sided, 34, 39 multiplicity of a Lyapunov exponent, 39, 133 natural extension, 65, 99 negative part of a function, 20 non-atomic measure, 102, 106 non-compactness condition, 105, 132, 134 normalized restriction, 59, 113 open simplex, 3 orbital sum, 21 orthogonal complement, 48 Oseledets decomposition, 34, 39, 60, 97 flag, 39, 41, 53, 97 sub-bundles, 39 subspaces, 39, 40 parabolic matrix, 4 parallelizable manifold, 8 pinching, 2, 113, 134, 139, 148 point p-expanding, 175 p-invariant, 175 pointwise convergence, 74 topology, 72 positive part of a function, 20 potential, 9 probabilistic repeller, 174 probability space complete, 38 separable, 38 projection theorem, 41 projective action, 106 cocycle, 68, 92, 137 space, 17 proper linear arrangement, 139 quasi-periodic Schr ̈odinger cocycle, 9 Radon–Nikodym derivative, 117 random matrices, 7, 68 Schr ̈odinger cocycle, 9 transformation, 67, 97 transformation (invertible), 77 transformation (one-sided), 70, 76 residual subset, 152, 153, 168 rotation, 3 s-holonomy, 188 Schr ̈odinger cocycle, 9 quasi-periodic, 9 random, 9 operator, 9 second return map, 154, 158, 167 self-coupling, 179 optimal, 179 symmetric, 179 semi-continuity, 151, 152, 160 separable metric space, 41 probability space, 38 sequence additive, 21 subadditive, 21 super-additive, 45 sequential compactness, 83 simple Lyapunov spectrum, 39, 133 simplicity criterion, 134 singular measures, 117 values, 133 slices of a set in a product space, 68 small subset, 126 special linear group, 6, 7 stabilizer of a measure, 108, 131 stable bundle, 10, 57, 135 holonomy, 188 set, 187 stationary function, 75 measure, 70, 101, 115, 171 set, 75 strong irreducibility, 102, 103, 105, 134 subadditive ergodic theorem, 20, 21 sequence, 21 subexponential decay, 31, 34, 35, 39 subharmonic function, 29, 30 18Index superadditive sequence, 45 support of a measure, 105 symmetric self-coupling, 179 optimal, 179 symplectic diffeomorphism, 163 form, 163 theorem invariance principle, 116 martingale convergence, 86, 87 of Baire, 169 of Birkhoff, 27 of continuity, 3, 171 of ergodic decomposition, 77 of Furstenberg, 2, 105 of Furstenberg (formula), 102 of Furstenberg-Kesten, 1, 20, 28 of Herman (formula), 29 of Kingman, 21 of Kingman (subadditive), 20 of Ledrappier, 97, 116 of Ma ̃n ́e–Bochi, 153 of Ma ̃n ́e-Bochi, 161 of Oseledets (one-sided), 30, 38 of Oseledets (two-sided), 34, 39 of Prohorov, 83 of Rokhlin, 85 of simplicity, 134 of Thieullen, 106 projection, 41 subadditive, 21 topological degree, 17 topology C 0 , 153 C 1 , 161 pointwise, 72 uniform, 72 weak ∗ , 72 total variation norm, 72 transition operator, 68 operator (adjoint), 69 probabilities, 68 transitive action, 162 twisting, 2, 113, 134, 139, 148 u-holonomy, 188 uniform convergence, 83 hyperbolicity, 10, 15 integrability, 103 topology, 72 unstable bundle, 10, 57, 135 holonomy, 188 set, 187 vector bundle, 8 dimension, 8 most contracted, 31 most expanded, 31 volume of a decomposablel-vector, 58 weak ∗ convergence, 74, 83 topology, 72